Baptism for the Dead in Early Christianity
I

n the first part of this series,

1

 we estab-

lished that apocalyptic Christian writers were 

deeply concerned about the fate of those who 

had no chance to receive the gospel in this life. They 

felt that an eternal condemnation meted out to 

these souls—simply because they had not accepted 

the inaccessible—was not in keeping with their 

understanding of a merciful God. 

This concern is the crux of the soteriological 

problem of evil, which is best stated as a logically 

inconsistent triad: (1) God is perfectly loving and 

just, desiring that all his children be saved; (2) salva-

tion comes only through an individual’s acceptance 

of Christ’s salvific gifts in this life; and (3) count-

less numbers of God’s children have died without 

having a chance to hear about, much less accept, 

Christ’s salvific gifts.2

 Surely, the God of mercy 

would offer salvation to all; according to some early 

apocalyptic Jewish and Christian writers, he has. 

Apocalyptic Jews taught that eternal damnation 

was a punishment reserved for fallen archangels 

and wicked men,3

 while righteous Gentiles would 

be spared such tortures.4

 However, this solution did 

not fully mitigate the soteriological problem of evil; righteous Gentiles, although escaping endless pun-

ishment, would not share in the exaltation of the 

covenant people.

Some early Christians, on the other hand, 

provided a more thorough solution than the said 

Jewish predecessors. They taught that righteous 

individuals could receive the gospel in the next life 

through postmortem evangelization, a work initi-

ated by Jesus’s descent into hell “to save those who 

had not known him on earth.”5

 However, some 

did not believe that postmortem acceptance of the 

gospel was sufficient to ensure the salvation of the 

deceased but that it must also be accompanied by 

vicarious ordinance work, a belief implicit in their 

involvement in baptisms for the dead. 

In this paper we will provide evidence that the 

practice of baptism for the dead existed in some 

early Christian6

 communities. We do not attempt to 

prove that baptism for the dead is a true teaching. 

This cannot be demonstrated by historical research. 

We intend only to trace the history of proxy bap-

tism in early Christianity and the theological 

rationale for its practice. To support our thesis, 

we will show that early Christians, including New 

Testament writers, taught that baptism is essential 

to salvation. Because of this belief, vicarious bap-

tisms were performed to ensure that the unbap-

tized dead would not be denied access to salvation. 

Next, we examine 1 Corinthians 15:29, arguing 

that metaphorical interpretations of this passage 

are ultimately unconvincing. Instead, we support 

what some modern scholars refer to as the “majority 

reading,”7

 which understands 15:29 as a reference 

to vicarious baptism. Third, we explore the possible 

origins of the practice by examining the texts that 

teach doctrines closely related to baptism for the 

dead. And, finally, we detail the historical practice 

of proxy baptisms by early Christian communities 

now labeled “heretical.” We argue, however, that 

retroactively measuring ancient Christian practices 

by later standards of orthodoxy is misguided and 

that we must, therefore, independently reexamine 

practices traditionally considered heretical.

Before setting out and assessing historical 

evidence for early Christian practice of proxy bap-

tisms for the dead, an important caveat is in order: 

though Joseph Smith believed that first-century 

Christians performed proxy baptisms,8

 the modern 

Latter-day Saint practice is not grounded on histori-

cal precedent. Rather, as we will detail in the last 

part of this series, it is based on modern revelation. 

Baptismal Theology of the New 

Testament and Patristic Literature

Proxy baptisms are based on the conviction that 

the sacrament of baptism is necessary for salvation. 

Accordingly, we will look at the teachings of New 

Testament and patristic writers regarding the neces-

sity of this sacred ordinance. These writers taught 

that baptism was essential for forgiveness of sins 

and for entrance into the church and into heaven. 

Indeed, according to Everett Ferguson in his highly 

respected study of early Christian liturgy, Chris-

tians through the first five centuries believed that 

baptism “effects salvation, forgiveness of sins, free-

dom from the rule of sin and death, purification, 

and washing.”9

Three main arguments from the New Testa-

ment support the essential nature of baptism. First, 

Christ himself is baptized, signifying the necessity 

for Christians to receive the same. Second, there are 

pivotal verses of scripture, such as John 3:5, Mark 

16:14–16, and Matthew 28:19, which, according to 

some scholars, affirm the necessity of baptism for 

salvation. Third, throughout the book of Acts, bap-

tism is without question the rite of initiation that 

all converts must undergo. According to Acts, this 

rite assures the convert a remission of sins and links 

them to Christ.

The synoptic Gospels all attest to the fact that 

Christ was baptized by John in order to “fulfill 

all righteousness” (Matthew 3:13–17; cf. Mark 1:9; 

Luke 3:21). W. F. Albright and C. S. Mann explain 

Christ’s baptism in relation to Matthew’s goal of 

showing Christ’s fulfillment of ancient scriptural 

prophecies. These scholars explain the term fulfill 

all righteousness as a reference to the “fulfillment 

of those Scriptures in which those demands are set 

out—law, prophets, writings. In any event, the bap-

tism administered by John was a direct response to 

the will of God, and so the Messiah must submit to 

it.”10 Thus Christ’s baptism, for Matthew, fulfilled 

both divine commands and ancient scripture (nota-

bly Isaiah 43:2 and Psalm 2:7). The Oxford Bible 

Commentary suggests that Matthew’s account dem-

onstrates this fulfillment of both commands and 

scripture by focusing on the apocalyptic vision that 

Christ receives upon baptism, in which God affirms Jesus as his Son and the Holy Ghost descends as 

a dove.11 A few Christian authors such as Hilary, 

Theodore of Mopsuestia, Chromatius, and Cyril of 

Alexandria declare Christ’s baptism as the example 

for Christians to follow, that they may receive sal-

vation and remission of sins.12 Although no New 

Testament text explicitly confirms the point, Jesus’s 

baptism likely became the foundation for later 

Christian baptism.13

Christ’s example of baptism is not alone in 

signaling the necessity of the ordinance. Mark 

16:15–16 declares a similar sentiment: “And he said 

unto them, Go ye into all the world, and preach 

the gospel to every creature. He that believeth and 

is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth 

not shall be damned.” It is quite certain that this 

passage was added to the text by a later author.14

Nonetheless, it still corroborates the doctrine of 

baptism, as it was added by a Christian who obvi-

ously believed baptism was salvifically requisite. 

This addition was added before ad 185, as it is 

quoted by Irenaeus15 and perhaps may be referenced 

earlier by Justin.16 Regardless, a Christian of the first 

or second century inserted these verses, and they 

were taken as canon by many Christians following 

thereafter. 

 Matthew’s Gospel records that the risen Christ 

instructs the apostles: “Go ye therefore, and teach 

all nations, baptizing them in the name of the 

Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: 

Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I 

have commanded you: and, lo, I am with you alway, 

even unto the end of the world. Amen” (Matthew 

28:19). According to Matthew, then, one of the 

duties of the apostles was to teach and baptize all 

nations.

Professor Ulrich Luz notes in his commentary 

on these verses that “the task of ‘making disciples’ 

of the nations involves first of all the command to 

baptize. Since baptism is the sign that all Christians 

have in common, the command to baptize is a con-

fession of the whole church.”17 He further explains, 

“It is certain that with their baptism the newly won 

disciples of Jesus follow the example of Jesus who 

also submitted to baptism (3:13–17). Just as in so 

doing he ‘fulfilled all righteousness,’ they too follow 

him onto the way of righteousness.”18 Matthew’s 

account of Christ’s ministry thus begins and ends19

with a call to baptism—first with the example of 

Christ’s own baptism in the third chapter of the 

work and finally with the risen Lord’s dramatic 

commission to go to “all nations” and baptize those 

who will believe and follow. Ferguson notes that 

“early Christians commonly based their practice of 

baptism on the dominical command of Matthew 

28:19 and on the Lord’s example.”20

John 3:5, when read straightforwardly, explic-

itly indicates that baptism by water is essential 

for “entrance into the kingdom of heaven.” Many 

Christian authors and writings from the early 

centuries—including Tertullian,21 Justin Martyr,22

Ambrose,23 Irenaeus,24 Cyprian,25 and the Seventh 

Council of Carthage26—cite John 3:5 as evidence 

for the necessity of baptism for salvation.Tertullian, 

for example, boldly declares: “The prescript is laid 

down that ‘without baptism, salvation is attainable 

by none’ (chiefly on the ground of that declaration 

of the Lord, who says, ‘Unless one be born of water, 

he hath not life’).”27 Modern scholars may disagree 

about the proper interpretation of John 3:5,28 but 

many prominent early church writers unequivocally 

read 3:5 as affirming that baptism is necessary for salvation. Finally, Christian history lends support to 

our claim that baptism was considered necessary. 

Throughout the book of Acts and the writings of the 

church fathers, baptism is viewed as the mandatory 

initiation rite for converts into Christendom. Acts 

2:38; 8:12, 38; 9:18; 10:48; 16:14–15, 30–34; 18:8; and 

22:16 all present historical evidence that whenever a 

group of people were converted to Christianity bap-

tism was the ordinance that initiated them into the 

faith. Lars Hartman, in the Anchor Bible Dictionary, 

notes, “It [Baptism] is treated as the undisputed ini-

tiation rite of the Church . . . baptism is mentioned 

as a natural step in connection with people’s accep-

tance of the message about Christ, i.e., becoming 

believers; . . . baptism was practised from the very 

beginning in the early church.”29 It further explains 

that, in Acts, “entering the Christian community 

through faith and baptism means to be ‘saved’ (2:40; 

11:14; 16:30–31).”30 Acts 2:38 is quite explicit in tying 

baptism with forgiveness of sins: “then Peter said 

unto them, repent, and be baptized every one of 

you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of 

sins.” This verse illustrates the Lukan understand-

ing of what it means to convert to Christianity: 

“Those who receive the apostolic message, recognize 

Jesus as Lord and Messiah, repent, and are baptized 

in his name receive forgiveness, the Holy Spirit, and 

salvation.”31

The Shepherd of Hermas reiterates that baptism 

is essential for a Christian. It says, “some teachers 

maintain that there is no other repentance than 

that which takes place, when we descended into the 

water and received remission of our former sins. . . . 

that [is] sound doctrine which you heard; for that is 

really the case.”32 In addition to the patristic fathers 

mentioned above in relation with John 3:5, Clement 

of Alexandria,33 Firmilian,34 Victorinus,35 Cyril of 

Jerusalem,36 John Chrysostom,37 Augustine,38 and 

Barnabas39 affirm the necessity of baptism for salva-

tion, repentance, remission of sins, begetting sons of 

God, or some other purpose which Christians must

receive. 

Other writings by Christian gnostics show a 

similar viewpoint. The Tripartite Tractate indicates 

that “there is no other baptism apart from this one 

alone, which is the redemption into God, Father, 

Son and Holy Spirit.”40 The Gospel of Philip teaches 

that “when speaking of baptism they say, ‘Baptism 

is a great thing,’ because if people receive it, they 

will live.”41 Marcion and his followers, who were 

not properly gnostics, seem to have viewed bap-

tism similarly and did not deviate much from what 

became the orthodox view on this issue.42

The New Testament, early Christian literature, 

and Christian history all affirm that many early 

Christians viewed baptism as essential for entrance 

into the kingdom of God. Everett Ferguson con-

cludes, “Although in developing the doctrine of 

baptism different authors had their particular favor-

ite descriptions, there is a remarkable agreement on 

the benefits received in baptism. And these are pres-

ent already in the New Testament texts. Two fun-

damental blessings are often repeated: the person 

baptized received forgiveness of sins and the gift of the Holy Spirit.”43 From such belief, the doctrine of 

vicarious baptism was a natural corollary. Appar-

ently, the earliest group mentioned to perform this 

sacrament for the dead is the Christian community 

at Corinth. 

Exegesis of 1 Corinthians 15:29

Ἐπεὶ τί ποιήσουσιν οἱ βαπτιζόμενοι ὑπὲρ τῶν 

νεκρῶν; εἰ ὅλως νεκροὶ οὐκ ἐγείρονται, τί καὶ

βαπτίζονται ὑπὲρ τῶν νεκρῶν.44

Else what shall they do which are baptized for 

the dead? If the dead rise not at all, why are they 

then baptized for the dead?45

Paul’s mention of the Corinthian practice of 

baptism for the dead has long troubled many Chris-

tians. A plain, matter-of-fact reading of 15:29 clearly 

speaks of vicarious baptism, but many scholars are 

unconvinced that such a reading is best. Indeed, 

scholarly consideration of this verse has produced 

more than two hundred variant readings. However, 

if the simplest reading were not so much at vari-

ance with modern baptismal theology, we would 

not expect the abundance of interpretations that 

attempt to remove this teaching from the New 

Testament or to portray it as an anomaly. We will 

review those interpretations of 15:29 which schol-

arly consensus judges most credible. Significantly, 

of this subset, vicarious baptism is the reading sup-

ported by the majority of scholars.46

We will focus on three main words in the 

verse while interpreting its meaning: βαπτίζω

(baptizō / baptized),47 ὑπὲρ (hyper / for),48 and 

νεκρῶν (nekrōn / dead).49 Those who do not view 

the baptism of 15:29 as referring to a vicarious ordi-

nance provide alternative readings for each of the 

aforementioned words. Following the analysis of 

these words, we will turn our attention to variant 

punctuations that seek to make 15:29 read as ordinary, as opposed to vicarious, baptism. This task is 

especially pertinent in that there is no punctuation 

in extant copies of New Testament documents. 

Baptizō spoken metaphorically. Scholars who 

treat the baptism spoken of in 1 Corinthians 15:29 

as figurative have largely based their interpretation 

on the meaning of baptizō. For example, St. Robert 

Bellarmine (1542–1621) writes: 

It is therefore the true and genuine explanation 

that the Apostle speaks concerning the bap-

tism of tears and penance which one receives 

by praying, fasting, and giving alms, etc. And 

the sense is “What will those who are baptized 

for the dead do if the dead do not rise?” That 

is, what will they do who pray, fast, grieve, 

and afflict themselves for the dead if the dead 

do not rise? In this way Ephraem in his book 

“Testamentum,” Peter the Venerable in his 

“Contra Petrobrusianos,” Dionysius, and others 

explain this passage.50

Bellarmine understands baptizō not as a reference 

to the Christian baptismal sacrament, but as other 

works done for the dead. This is a significant inter-

pretation for adherents of Catholicism since this 

understanding lends scriptural support to their 

concept of purgatory and the works of penance that 

release the souls bound there. Interestingly, though, 

such a reading does not discredit the ideas upon 

which baptism for the dead rest. Even if the verse 

is taken metaphorically, the works of penance and 

the release of souls from purgatory are literal. There 

is common ground between the LDS and Catholic 

views of vicarious works. Both imply that the living 

can perform acts to help the deceased in their post-

mortal advancement.51

However, any metaphorical interpretation of 

baptizō seems inconsistent with the body of Pauline 

literature and with the New Testament as a whole. 

T. J. Conant, after conducting a thorough analysis of 

the use of the word baptism in biblical and patristic 

literature, concludes that baptism almost always 

refers to the Christian sacrament of immersion, 

the only exceptions being Mark 10:38–39 and Luke 

12:50.52 Conant also notes that many commentators 

have viewed 1 Corinthians 15:29 in reference to the 

baptismal rite, which reading he neither condones 

nor condemns.53 So, while a figurative reading has 

some precedence, the literal reading is much more 

common.

When viewed in the context of Pauline lit-

erature as a whole, baptizō is consistently used 

in a literal sense (that is, to refer to sacramental 

immersion). Paul makes reference to baptism in 

Colossians 2:12; Hebrews 6:2; Romans 6:3, 4; Gala-

tians 3:27; 1 Corinthians 1:13, 14, 15, 16 (twice), 17; 

10:2; 12:13; and 15:29 (twice), for a total of fifteen 

times. In each of the other thirteen usages (exclud-

ing 15:29) baptizō is used literally. Michael F. Hull 

points out that “in all, each and every one of these 

eight instances of βαπτίζω in 1 Corinthians is to 

be read literally.”54 Hull concludes, “What of the 

two instances of baptizō in 15:29? Given Paul’s 

other uses of the term, and especially his use 

thereof in 1 Corinthians, we can read them only in 

like manner. There is no compelling reason to do 

otherwise.”55

It seems difficult to interpret baptizō in any way 

other than literally in 15:29.56 If taken literally, the 

Corinthian community was practicing actual bap-

tism. However, this alone is not sufficient evidence 

to conclude that these baptisms were being per-

formed vicariously for the dead.57 Instead, we must view the meaning of ὑπὲρ in context with νεκρῶν to 

fully comprehend the meaning of the verse. 

1 Corinthians 15:29 as ordinary baptism, an 

alternative reading of ὑπὲρ and νεκρῶν. A frequent 

interpretation of 15:29 among scholars is that of 

baptism in its literal sense but not performed on 

behalf of the dead. To maintain such a reading, 

the standard usage of the Greek preposition ὑπὲρ

(hyper) or of the adjective νεκρῶν (nekrōn) must be 

altered. 

John D. Reaume, who championed an alterna-

tive reading of hyper, stated that “the understanding 

of the preposition ὑπὲρ and the resulting theologi-

cal implications are the decisive issues in this crux 

interpretum.”58 The way the preposition is read 

determines whether vicarious or ordinary baptism 

is meant. Most scholars who subscribe to such an 

approach feel that 15:29 is a reference to “baptism 

by example.” 

Maria Raeder believes that in 15:29 Paul refers 

to Corinthians who desired to undergo ordinary 

baptism for themselves so they could join with their 

deceased loved ones in the hereafter. She believed 

that such a practice was motivated not by faith in 

Christ, but by a hope to inherit heaven, a less than 

fully honorable observance of the Christian sacra-

ment.59 Central to Raeder’s position is to render 

hyper in a final sense,60 giving the verse a sense of 

finality or, rather, for what goal or for what purpose 

some action is being performed. In this light, the 

verse now refers to a “baptism by example” in which 

the catechumen is compelled to baptism by the 

example of the dead.

In reference to Raeder’s translation of ὑπὲρ in 

its final sense, Joel R. White characterizes Raeder’s 

concept as “pure conjecture; there is no historical or 

biblical evidence for any such practice anywhere in 

the ancient world.”61 Second, he regards her read-

ing as “unrelated to the context” of Paul’s letter as a 

whole.62

White, in opposition to Raeder, feels that hyper 

should be read in its causal sense.63 He interprets 

nekrōn as a figurative reference to the apostles 

and their persecution unto death. Consequently, 

he translates 1 Corinthians 15:29 in the following 

manner: “Otherwise what will those do who are 

being baptized on account of the dead (that is, the 

dead, figuratively speaking; that is, the apostles)? 

For if truly dead persons are not raised, why at all 

are people being baptized on account of them (that 

is, the apostles)?”64 White suggests that Paul consid-

ers himself as one of the “dead,” due to the persecu-

tions that accompany apostleship.

However, such a reading seems 

arbitrary. In order to understand why, 

it is important to spell out the entire 

Greek of 15:29: 

Ἐπεὶ τί ποιήσουσιν οἱ

βαπτιζόμενοι ὑπὲρ τῶν νεκρῶν; εἰ 

ὅλως νεκροὶ οὐκ ἐγείρονται, τί καὶ

βαπτίζονται ὑπὲρ τῶν νεκρῶν.

According to Hull, “White . . . pro-

pounds a metaphorical reading for 

τῶν νεκρῶν in 15:29a and claims 

that ὅλως functions attributively to 

modify νεκροὶ in 15:29b. The for-

mer ‘dead’ he equates with the apostles; the lat-

ter ‘dead’ are the actually dead”—in other words, 

“White contends that the same word is used in the 

same sentence to mean entirely different things.”65

So, without further criterion as to why White uses 

this modifier in distinct and varied ways within 

the same context, his usage certainly appears arbi-

trary, and we cannot be persuaded to accept his 

translation.

Furthermore, as with baptizō, hyper and nekrōn

are used in a consistent manner in Pauline litera-

ture; hyper is almost always used by Paul in its geni-

tive sense—that is, “on behalf of.”66 The final and 

causal senses previously discussed seldom occur 

in Pauline literature.67 Additionally, “In Paul’s let-

ters, νεκρός [nekros] is always used as a noun in the 

literal sense.”68 Thus, a straightforward reading of 

the three words in question appears to be the most sound interpretation and consistent with Paul’s 

writings as a whole.

1 Corinthians 15:29 with variant punctuation. 

Some biblical scholars have taken still another 

approach toward reading 15:29 as ordinary baptism. 

This approach does not try to give alternative trans-

lations to any of the words in question, but instead 

punctuates 15:29 in a way that makes the verse read 

like a reference to ordinary baptism, something pro-

ponents of this reading find more in line with Pau-

line theology. Since the original Greek manuscripts 

of the New Testament contain no punctuation at all, 

we must consider the methods of punctuation used 

by translators of the KJV and comparable versions 

of the Bible. 

In explaining why he opted for a variation in 

the punctuation of the text, Bernard M. Foschini 

states that he considers the approach “more simple 

and more probable than any other, 

because it seems most consonant 

with manuscript, with Pauline style, 

with the nature of Baptism, with the 

signification of the preposition hyper

and with the words tōn nekrōn.”69

Foschini further claims that the word 

“baptizesthai has nothing to do with 

the phrase, hyper tōn nekrōn, and 

is to be separated from it by a ques-

tion mark,”70 rendering the following 

translation of 15:29: “Otherwise what 

shall they do who are baptized? For 

the dead? (that is, are they baptized 

to belong to, to be numbered among the dead, who 

are never to rise again)? Indeed, if the dead do not 

rise again at all, why are people baptized? For them? 

(that is, are they baptized to be numbered among 

the dead who are never to rise again?).”71

Foschini takes his analysis from Dürselen, a 

German scholar, and his punctuation is therefore 

very similar to Dürselen’s. Yet, Foschini diverges 

from Dürselen’s approach by positing that while 

Dürselen was right to separate “to be baptized” and 

“for the dead,” Dürselen breaks the rhetorical paral-

lel Paul was building between verses 29 and 30 by 

punctuating them in such a way as to improperly 

link “on behalf of” with verse 30.72

However, as Reaume points out, there is an 

“insurmountable difficulty”73 with such an inter-

pretation. Foschini’s reading, which preserves the 

parallel between verses 29 and 30, leans heavily 

on a skewed interpretation of hyper. According to 

Reaume, Foschini seeks to give an interpretation 

to hyper that makes it synonymous with εἰς “into.” 

Reaume asserts that such a reading is doubtful, 

as the nuance upon which it depends is evident 

only in classical Greek,74 whereas the New Testa-

ment was written in Koine Greek, which flourished 

between 300 bc and ad 300. Consequently, Fos-

chini has to appeal to extrabiblical texts of a differ-

ent time period to establish his case. Due to these 

considerations, Hull concludes that “such a des-

perate attempt to read ὑπὲρ [hyper] as εἰς dimin-

ishes Foschini’s argument to the point of facile 

refutation.”75

Hull also presented an interpretation of 15:29 

that appeals to variant punctuation. Hull’s under-

taking is no small enterprise. He examines 15:29 not 

only from a historical standpoint but from a literary 

standpoint, giving a lengthy treatment of Paul’s 

theology and his manner of writing as a guide 

toward a greater understanding of how the apostle 

intended the difficult passage in question. In the 

opening pages of his work, Hull states his case: “In 

our rereading, we see that 1 Cor 15:29 is a reference 

to ordinary baptism. . . . Baptism ‘on account of the 

dead’ is baptism into eternal life; it is a rite for the 

living, and undergoing it expresses faith in the res-

urrection of Christ and of Christians.”76

Hull’s coverage of the literary issues regarding 

15:29 is, in our opinion, one of the best treatments 

on the subject. However, we are not compelled to 

accept his interpretation for two reasons. First, 

Hull recognizes that 15:29 is a crux interpretum. 

Not only does he express this outright, but he also 

acknowledges that “while it is true that the liter-

ary context does not necessitate such a reading of ordinary baptism any more than it necessitates the 

majority reading of vicarious baptism, the literary 

context does not, in fact, demand a reading one way 

or the other.”77 So, even with all textual information 

considered, there is no objective way of deciding 

between ordinary and vicarious baptism. Secondly, 

in agreement with David Kuck, we conclude that 

while “Hull’s causal reading of the preposition 

is possible,” its viability is not strong, since “on 

account of the dead” must be read as “on account 

of faith in the resurrection of the dead,”78 a reading 

which the text itself does not need in order to func-

tion in the larger literary context. Once again, it 

appears to us that a straightforward reading of 15:29 

avoids the most difficulties.

1 Corinthians 15:29 as vicarious baptism. As has 

been shown, 1 Corinthians 15:29 is a crux interpre-

tum. Of the over two hundred interpretations, only a 

few remain as “legitimate possibilities.”79 The afore-

mentioned analysis was not meant to resolve these 

interpretive issues; instead, it was intended to famil-

iarize the reader with some of the textual difficulties 

and interpretations associated with this verse. 

Latter-day Saints affirm without reservation 

that a straightforward, literal reading is best. And 

we are not alone in this approach. It has previously 

been shown that the reading of 15:29 as a reference 

to vicarious baptism is in fact the majority read-

ing among modern biblical scholars. These scholars 

have recognized that a literal reading is best, as it 

avoids many of the aforementioned difficulties. Any 

alteration, either in semantics or in syntax, gener-

ally creates more problems than it solves. William F. 

Orr and James A. Walther conclude that:

The allusion to the idea and/or practice of 

baptism on behalf of the dead is unique in the 

New Testament in this passage. . . . Close in-

spection of the language of the reference makes 

all attempts to soften or eliminate its literal 

meaning unsuccessful. An endeavor to under-

stand the dead as persons who are “dead in sin” 

does not really help; for the condition offered, 

if the dead are not being raised at all, makes it 

clear that the apostle is writing about persons 

who are physically dead. It appears that under 

the pressure of concern for the eternal destiny 

of dead relatives or friends some people in the 

church were undergoing baptism on their behalf 

in the belief that this would enable the dead to 

receive the benefits of Christ’s salvation. Paul 

remarks about the practice without specifying 

who or how many are involved and without 

identifying himself with them. He attaches nei-

ther praise nor blame to the custom. He does 

take it as an illustration of faith in a future des-

tiny of the dead.80

New Testament scholar Leon L. Morris, in the Tyn-

dale New Testament Commentaries, expresses a 

similar sentiment:

This reference to baptism for (hyper) the dead is 

a notorious difficulty. The most natural mean-

ing of the expression is that some early believers 

got themselves baptized on behalf of friends of 

theirs who had died without receiving that sac-

rament. Thus Parry says: “The plain and neces-

sary sense of the words implies the existence of 

a practice of vicarious baptism at Corinth, pre-

sumably on behalf of believers who died before 

they were baptized.” He stigmatizes all other 

interpretations as “evasions . . . wholly due to 

the unwillingness to admit such a practice, and 

still more to a reference to it by S. Paul without 

condemnation.”81

Yet, there are those who affirm this reading, 

qualified with the explanation that the Corinthian 

Saints were engaging in a heretical practice. Those 

who hold such a position often assert that Paul was 

merely referencing vicarious baptism to demon-

strate the inconsistencies of denying the resurrec-

tion and yet baptizing the deceased: “Else what shall 

they do which are baptized by the dead, if the dead 

rise not at all?” Arthur Carr asserts that ordinar-

ily Paul would have strongly discouraged such a 

disreputable practice; however, he did not want to 

offend the tender new converts of Corinth. Conse-

quently, Paul neither condemns nor approves such a 

practice; he merely points out the inconsistency.82

Readings such as Carr’s seem fairly common 

among biblical scholars. Richard E. DeMaris is one 

such scholar who attempts to justify his position 

with modern archaeological findings in connection 

with first-century Corinthian culture. He points out 

that archaeological excavations show that Corin-

thian citizens of the time were vested in cults of 

the dead. DeMaris asserts that what was happening 

in Corinth was simply a “phenomenon” that was 

catalyzed by the aforementioned cultic practices. He insists, however, that vicarious baptism was “neither 

widespread nor long-lived.”83

DeMaris’s claim cannot be reasonably main-

tained. After all, Christian communities that were 

very widespread and endured for a significant 

amount of time engaged in this practice. DeMaris 

seems to take for granted that there is no connec-

tion between these groups and Corinth, but lack of 

textual evidence establishing such a connection is 

not sufficent to conclude that there was none. That 

would be an argument from silence.

Additionally, many sects within the Judeo-

Christian tradition have espoused some form of 

vicarious work for the deceased, from 

the Catholics and their ancient doc-

trine of penitence for souls bound in 

purgatory, to the ancient Israelites’ 

concern with proper burial. Religions 

unrelated to the Judeo-Christian tra-

dition also have variations of vicari-

ous work for the dead.84

Granted, none of these examples 

compare exactly with vicarious bap-

tisms for the dead. However, the general principle 

is the same: the living can perform some rite or act 

whereby the deceased may progress in a postmortal 

sphere. Without these vicarious efforts, the dead do 

not advance. So DeMaris’s claims that the Christian 

practice of baptisms for the dead was a “phenom-

enon” that was not “widespread” gives us reason to 

pause.

Yet, even given DeMaris’s critique, we still 

contend that Paul’s failure to openly condemn the 

practice was in effect an endorsement of the same. It 

has been asserted that Paul’s lack of condemnation 

on the subject has a parallel to Paul’s initial unwill-

ingness to condemn the practice of eating meat sac-

rificed to idols (1 Corinthians 8:10). But the parallel 

is weak, since Paul does state explicitly later in the 

same epistle that such a practice is inherently wrong 

(1 Corinthians 10:21). We do not find that in respect 

to baptisms for the dead. 

An additional point also needs to be made on 

this topic. As previously pointed out, Carr believes 

that Paul did not openly condemn the practice of 

vicarious baptism because he did not want to offend 

new converts. But reflecting on the greater part of 

Pauline writings, including his epistle to the Cor-

inthians, leaves one to wonder if there can be an 

example found of Paul holding back condemnation 

for fear of offense. Throughout 1 Corinthians Paul 

unabashedly condemns instances when the Corin-

thian community has strayed; one hardly gets the 

sense that Paul is ever concerned about wounding 

the tender Corinthian heart. Carr’s statement seems 

to be out of harmony with the whole tenor of 1 Cor-

inthians and based on pure speculation. H. V. Mar-

tin reads the verse in question just as Carr does. He 

feels that Paul is pointing out the inconsistency of 

the Corinthian practice, with their skewed belief on 

the resurrection. Yet, Martin disagrees with Carr. 

He feels that by abstaining from condemnation Paul 

is actually giving his approval to such a practice.85

The theologian Fernard Prat does not take the 

case quite as far as Martin, but he does lend con-

siderable support to the concept of work for the 

deceased. Prat feels that Paul neither condemns or 

approves of the practice. Instead, he insists that Paul 

sees in it 

a profession of faith in the resurrection of the 

dead. . . . [the] practice was . . . a solemn pro-

testation that the deceased belonged to Jesus 

Christ and that he had lacked the requisite time, 

but not the desire, to become an effective mem-

ber of the visible Church. Nor were they mis-

taken in thinking that through the communion 

of saints an act of faith and piety on their part 

could be profitable to the deceased.86

As can clearly be discerned, many scholars see 

vicarious baptism as the most plausible interpreta-

tion of 15:29, simply due to its immunity from the 

perplexities generated by all other readings.

Ancient support for 1 Corinthians 15:29 as 

vicarious baptism. Two early Christian theologians 

also affirm that first century Corinthian saints prac-

ticed vicarious baptisms, the first being Tertullian. 

Writing sometime in the late second to early third 

century, Tertullian took it upon himself to define 

the Christian faith (in effect, delineating a standard for determining heresy). In one 

of his earliest works, On the 

Resurrection of the Flesh, Ter-

tullian discusses baptism for 

the dead and the community at 

Corinth. After quoting 1 Corin-

thians 15:29 he states: “Now it 

is certain that they adopted this 

(practice) with such a presump-

tion as made them suppose that 

the vicarious baptism (in ques-

tion) would be beneficial to the 

flesh of another in anticipation 

of the resurrection.”87 Tertul-

lian, using the phrases vicarious 

baptism and flesh of another

frankly acknowledges that the 

Corinthians engaged in the 

practice under the belief that it 

would benefit their dead. 

However, in a later work, 

Against Marcion,

88 he reinter-

prets the verse, explaining that 

to be baptized “for the dead” 

was really only to be “baptized 

for the body” because “it is the 

body which becomes dead.”89

It seems that he is attempt-

ing to recant his earlier state-

ments about Corinth and deny 

that “vicarious baptism . . . 

for the flesh of another” ever 

occurred. Jeffrey Trumbower 

argues persuasively that Tertul-

lian, while combating Marcion 

in Against Marcion, goes at 

length to ensure that 15:29 is 

not construed to legitimatize 

baptism for the dead presum-

ably because Marcion himself 

has endorsed the practice. 

Trumbower concludes, “It is 

significant that Tertullian only 

makes these moves when combating the Marcion-

ites, leading me to conclude that between the writ-

ing of De Resurrectione and Adversus Marcionem

he had learned of their (Marcionites) practice based 

on 1 Corinthians, some 200 years before it received 

a full reporting in John Chrysostom.”90 Tertul-

lian’s remarks thus provide good evidence that the 

Marcionites were practicing baptism for the dead 

as early as the late second or early third century 

ad—a rite that continued until at least the early 

fifth century. 
Apart from Tertullian’s change in language with 

regard to baptism for the dead, he also mentions 

while attacking Marcion, the “Februarian lustra-

tions”91 and prayer for the dead as a parallel to the 

rite. Although ambiguous, Tertullian seems to con-

nect baptism (either the Marcionite practice of bap-

tism for the dead or the Corinthian one) with these 

Roman forms of vicarious offerings and prayers for 

the deceased. It seems that the baptismal rite was 

in existence at the time and was not simply baptism 

“for the body” for every Christian of the time. 

Further, the writer now known as Ambrosia-

ster,92 writing in the latter half of the fourth century, 

substantiates Tertullian’s initial confirmation of 

Corthinian proxy baptisms. In his famous com-

mentaries on the Epistles of Paul, he notes “that 

some people were at that time (of 1st Corinthians 

construction) being baptized for the dead because 

they were afraid that someone who was not bap-

tized would either not rise at all or else rise merely 

in order to be condemned.”93 He clearly affirms the 

practice and argues that Paul refers to such work in 

his epistle. Although scholars have difficulties ascer-

taining the identity of “Ambrosiaster,” his remarks 

provide further evidence that some Christians in 

the early centuries continued to read 15:29 as refer-

ence to vicarious ordinance work. 

Origins of the Lost Practice

The New Testament and other early Christian 

literature give some important insights as to how 

the earliest Saints viewed posthumous salvation 

and vicarious ordinance work for the dead. Many 

apocryphal, gnostic, and even New Testament writ-

ings present themes that are reasonably connected 

with baptism for the dead. Perhaps these texts are 

merely echoes of the true origin of the work, or 

they mirrored an existing practice. We will look 

at a number of different texts, some from the New 

Testament, others apocryphal,94 some purporting to 

be forty-day literature,95 others from the gnostics, to 

examine the teachings that seem to provide a way 

for accepting baptism for the dead under Christian 

theology, searching for their origin in Christian 

thought.

 In the case of Paul, it is not far removed from 

his general theology to assume that vicarious ordi-

nance work, particularly proxy baptisms for the 

dead, was plausibly a part of his own beliefs and 

teachings. Unquestionably, vicarious work—in the 

figure of Jesus Christ—was the central theme of 

Christian belief in Pauline theology; Christianity, 

for Paul, hinges on the salvific gifts of Christ. Christ 

is a “propitiation . . . for the remission of sins” 

(Romans 3:25). Paul even recounts his own “suffer-

ings for you,” where, by his own exertion, he fills up 

“that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ in 

my flesh for his body’s sake, which is the church” 

(Colossians 1:24). In this context Paul is perform-

ing vicarious work to make up for the shortcom-

ings of the church as a whole. With the emphasis 

Paul places on baptism elsewhere in his writings 

(Romans 6:1–5; Galatians 3:26–27),96 “it is not a 

stretch to imagine a Pauline community practicing 

vicarious baptism for those who had died ‘in the 

faith,’ but without baptism.”97
Another interesting New Testament writing is 

the epistle of Peter, specifically 1 Peter 3:19–22 and 

4:6, which speaks of Christ’s evangelization of the 

dead, a belief that relates directly to the doctrine of 

vicarious ordinance work, where Christ is preach-

ing to the “spirits” or to the “dead” (3:19; 4:6). Verse 

4:6 is more direct in its wording that those being 

taught are the “dead” (nekrois), meaning those 

who are physically dead rather than the vague 

term spirits (pneumasin), and states that the gos-

pel is being preached to the deceased so that “they 

might be judged according to men in the flesh, but 

live according to God in the spirit.” Scholars are 

divided over the relation of these two passages of 

scripture and whether or not they refer to the same 

event in which “spirits” and “dead” are equiva-

lent, with Christ being the subject of both verbs 

(ekēryxen and euaggelisthē, both usually translated 

as “preached”).98 Regardless of what stance is taken, 

some form of postmortem evangelism is clearly 

reported in the verses in question, particularly 4:6.99

Referring to 1 Peter 4:6, Ernest Best notes that 

“the Gospel is now offered to those who never 

had the opportunity of hearing it when alive.”100

However, he observes that a likely objection to 

this assertion is the implication that a “second 

chance” remains for the dead. This, he states, is 

incompatible with other verses within 1 Peter that 

affirm that death is the final judgment for men.101

Later scholars have concurred with his objection, 

arguing that the dead referred to must be those who 

have died among the group addressed in the epistle, 

who accepted the gospel while in mortality.102 But 

these scholars fail to explain why those who have 

already received the gospel need it preached to 

them again upon death. It is far more reasonable 

that the “dead” referred to are those who did not 

have the opportunity to receive Christ while in 

mortality. None of the verses of 1 Peter that they 

cite explicitly state that there is no “second chance” 

for the dead. Peter’s warnings appear more precisely 

to discourage procrastination of repentance.

If the dead were indeed given an opportunity 

to accept the gospel of Christ, then certainly this 

would open room for the idea of proxy baptisms on 

their behalf. First Peter suggests baptism as requisite 

for salvation (3:21),103 thus providing a basis for a 

theology that includes vicarious work for those who 

cannot perform rites for themselves. 

The Apocalypse of Peter104 shows a different 

theme, in which the righteous can affect the salva-

tion of the condemned dead. It presents scenes from 

the final judgment of the world, with the wicked 

receiving their eternal punishment. In chapter 14, 

some of the damned are saved at the behest of those 

who are with God. The Greek text, purported by 

Dennis D. Buchholz and Montague R. James to 

be closest to the original writings, 

explains, “I will g<ive> to my called 

and my elect whomever they request 

of me from out of punishment. And 

I will give them a beautiful baptism 

in salvation from the Acherousian 

Lake which is said to be in the Elysian 

Field, a share in righteousness with 

my saints.”105

Apparently, the righteous are able 

to choose certain damned souls, who 

are then released from eternal pun-

ishment and receive baptism (literal 

or figurative) that they might be saved 

with their counterparts. Buchholz concludes that 

this scene “teaches a form of universal salvation, 

that is, if any who are saved request pardon for any 

wicked, . . . the latter will be released from punish-

ment.”106 These same lines are paraphrased in the 

Sibylline Oracles, and the doctrine therein is the 

same, whereby some of the damned souls are given 

salvation at the hands of God through intervention 

by righteous people. Interestingly, the later Ethiopic 

translation of the Apocalypse of Peter changes the 

wording of these lines so that no second chance 

could be interpreted from the text. This was likely 

done because “someone had theological objections 

to it.”107 Further, the Sibylline Oracles, when para-

phrasing this scene from the Apocalypse of Peter, contains a small interjectory note written by a later 

author declaring that the doctrine taught concern-

ing damned souls was “plainly false: for the fire will 

never cease to torment the damned. I indeed could 

pray that it might be so, who am branded with the 

deepest scars of transgressions which stand in need 

of utmost mercy. But let Origen be ashamed of his 

lying words, who saith that there is a term set to 

the torments.”108 The idea that righteous people 

could intervene on behalf of the condemned and 

that their punishment would see an end was appar-

ently held by the authors of these two texts and by 

Origen. According to such beliefs, which are related 

to other teachings of the era about affecting the 

salvation of the dead, baptism on their behalf cer-

tainly seems plausible. Another important area of 

research in relation to the doctrine of salvation for 

the dead is Christ’s three-day descent into Sheol or 

Hades. Early Christians believed that after Christ 

died on the cross, he descended into hell to evange-

lize the dead. To those who accepted him, he placed 

his “name upon their head(s)” and made them 

“free.”109 This rite was called Chrismation, which 

would almost always be linked with baptism in later 

church practice.110 After preaching to the unevan-

gelized dead, Christ returned to the earth for his 

Forty-Day ministry, in which he was continually 

“speaking of the things pertaining to the kingdom 

of God” (Acts 1:3). 

A common form of symbolism to express 

Christ’s descent is breaking the gates of hell or 

unlocking them with his key,111 as discussed in the 

“Harrowing of Hell,” the first article in this series.112

Christ’s mention of his descensus to Sheol to preach 

the gospel and free the captives there is certainly 

linked with the idea that the dead therefore need 

baptism.113 If they need the gospel preached to 

them, why not the saving rite of baptism? The 

Epistula Apostolorum, a composition dating 

roughly to ad 140–150, describes the purpose for 

Christ’s descent. In the text, the Savior speaks of 

the resurrection and the ultimate redemption and 

judgment of the souls on earth, in which all men 

will be judged “in regard of that that they have 

done, whether it be good or evil.” He then continues 

with this important statement:

For to that end went I down unto the place of 

Lazarus, and preached unto the righteous and 

the prophets, that they might come out of the 

rest which is below and come up into that which 

is above; and I poured out upon them with my 

right hand the water (baptism, Eth.) of life and 

forgiveness and salvation from all evil, as I have 

done unto you and unto them that believe on 

me.114

The Savior indicates that his descent and preach-

ing to the righteous dead and the former prophets are 

tied to the resurrection. Further, the righteous dead, 

the former prophets, and those who are unevange-

lized, receive the “water of life,” or baptism—the very 

thing that brings “salvation from all evil.” Appar-

ently, this was a central reason for his descent into 

the underworld—to provide baptism for the righ-

teous souls there that they might be judged correctly 

and “come up into that which is above.” 

The gnostic writing the Apocryphon of John

(which is a conversation between the risen Lord and 

the apostle John written around ad 150)115 discusses 

further the purpose of Christ’s descent. Within the 

text the divine Forethought116 reveals to John:

I entered the midst of darkness and the bowels 

of the underworld,117 turning to my task. The 

foundations of chaos shook as though to fall 

upon those who dwell in chaos and destroy 

them. . . . I hurried back to the root of my light 

so they might not be destroyed before their 

time. . . . I brightened my face with light from 

the consummation of their realm and entered 

the midst of their prison, which is the prison of 

the body. I said, Let whoever hears arise from 

deep sleep.118

The text concludes with Christ meeting a cer-

tain person in the depths, someone who is repentant 

and ready to be released. Christ then notes, “I raised 

and sealed the person in luminous water with Five 

Seals that death might not prevail over the person 

from that moment on.”119 In a number of separate 

Sethian writings (the gnostic Christian community 

or classification to which the Apocryphon of John

is attributed), the Five Seals referred to are thought 

to be the “final act of deliverance” or “a baptismal 

rite.”120 Thus the final saving ordinance that instills 

life and awakens those who are dead from their 

“deep sleep” is the rite of baptism.

The theme of the Five Seals is discussed further 

in a number of other texts. The Trimorphic Proten-

noia (NHC XIII) uses the symbolism in a way that 

confirms the interpretation of the Five Seals as 

some form of baptismal rite or liturgy.121 Composed sometime in the early to middle second century 

ad—and possibly even included “in a codex that 

originally contained the long version of the Apocry-

phon of John” and On the Origin of the World122—it 

recounts the three descents of the gnostic savior 

called Protennoia (interpreted to be Christ by the 

gnostic Christians using the work). During one of 

the descents, Protennoia describes cleansing a per-

son and providing him with certain salvific initia-

tions. The text recounts:

[I gave to him] from the Water [of Life, which 

strips] him of the Chaos [that is in the] utter-

most [darkness] that exists [inside] the entire 

[abyss], that is, the thought of [the corporeal] 

and the psychic. All these I put on. And I 

stripped him of it and I put upon him a shining 

Light, that is, the knowledge of the Thought of 

the Fatherhood. And I delivered him to those 

who give robes—Yammon, Elasso, Amenai—

and they [covered] him with a robe from the 

robes of the Light; and I delivered him to the 

Baptists and they baptized him—Micheus, 

Michar, Mn[e]s[i]nous—and they immersed 

him in the spring of the [Water] of Life. . . . And 

I delivered him to those who glorify—Ariom, 

Elien, Phariel—and they glorified him with 

the glory of the Fatherhood. And those who 

snatch away snatched away—Kamaliel [ ]

anen, Samblo, the servants of <the> great holy 

Luminaries—and they took him into the light—

[place] of his Fatherhood. And [he received] 

the Five Seals from [the Light] of the Mother, 

Protennoia, and it was [granted] him [to] par-

take of [the mystery] of knowledge, and [he be-

came a Light] in Light.123

In the text, the Five Seals are taken in conjunc-

tion with other ceremonial practices that together 

provide the culminating salvation for the recipient. 

Salvation is hence described through “stripping, 

investing in a garment of light, robing, spring bap-

tism, enthroning, glorifying and rapture, followed 

by reception of the five seals from the Light of the 

Mother so that (the recipient) partakes of the mys-

tery of knowledge and becomes a light in light.”124

Baptism and the Five Seals intertwine with other 

saving rituals to provide salvation for those who are 

recipients; one is incomplete without the other. The 

ordinances mentioned in the text are reminiscent 

of temple themes encountered in apocalyptic Jew-

ish texts centered on themes of ascent and ethereal 

ritual, where the recipient of such blessings is nor-

mally taken to heaven.125

While introducing the Trimorphic Protennoia, 

the translator/commentator declares that “the bap-

tismal rite of the Five Seals is a mystery of celestial 

ascent which strips off the psychic and somatic gar-

ments of ignorance, transforming and purifying 

Protennoia’s members and clothing them with radi-

ant light.”126 Further, “the author’s [of the gnostic 

texts in question] reference to the recipients of this 

rite in the first-person plural and as ‘brethren’ sug-

gests a [Sethian] community with a well-established 

tradition of water baptism which has been spiritual-

ized into a mystery of ascent.”127

These Sethian gnostics appear to elicit an 

elaborate liturgy and doctrine by viewing baptism 

and celestial ascent as two sides of the same coin. 

Indeed, their writings indicate a near obsession with 

receiving the saving gnosis and ultimately removing 

themselves from this world through liturgical rites. 

In these texts, then, the celestial ascent appears 

inseparable from baptism and the Five Seals.128 Each 

provides a connecting link and an escape from 

the shackles of mortality, allowing the recipient to 

be reborn. Interestingly, they extend this doctrine 

to cover the dead as well, as already noted in the 

Apocryphon of John. Thus, the dead who receive the 

gnostic salvation will be baptized and receive the 

accompanying rites and all things surrounding the 

Five Seals. 

In the Apocryphon of John, immediately prior 

to the scene that speaks of the Five Seals and saving 

the dead, John poses a question that elicits a curi-

ous response from the risen Lord. John asks, “Lord, 

how can the soul become younger and return into 

its mother’s womb, or into the human?”129 The com-

mentator notes, “Returning to the mother’s womb 

is also a theme encountered in John 3:4,” in which 

a similar inquiry is made by Nicodemus, “How 

can a man be born when he is old? Can he enter 

the second time into his mother’s womb, and be 

born?” In responding to the query of Nicodemus, 

Christ teaches him, “Except a man be born of water 

and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom 

of God” (John 3:5). In his response to John in the 

gnostic text, the Savior recounts, “You are truly 

blessed, for you have understood. This soul will be 

made to follow another soul in whom the spirit of 

life dwells, and she is saved through that one.”130
The Lord’s phrasing appears to suggest vicarious or 

proxy salvation in which the living provide those 

who are “dead” in some sense with access to saving 

grace. The soul, when being reborn, must follow one 

who is already living, in whom “life” dwells. To save 

those souls who need the opportunity to be reborn, 

the act must become operative through a living 

agent. What could the living do to assist the dead to 

gain salvation—taking into account the close paral-

lel between the question asked by Nicodemus and 

the question posed in the gnostic text? Given the 

Lord’s answer to Nicodemus (to be born of water 

and of the spirit), it seems the answer 

would be baptism for the dead.

Another gnostic text, the Pistis 

Sophia,

131 a discursive writing pur-

porting to contain the instructions of 

the risen Lord to his apostles, hints at 

vicarious baptism for those who die 

without the ordinance. In one par-

ticularly notable scene, Maria (Mary) 

poses the question to Jesus:

My Lord, if a good man has 

fulfilled all the mysteries, and he has 

a relative, in a word, he has a man 

and that man is an impious one who 

has committed all the sins which are 

worthy of the outer darkness; and 

he has not repented; or he has com-

pleted his number of cycles in the 

changes of the body, and that man 

has done nothing profitable and has 

come forth from the body; and we 

have known of him certainly that 

he has sinned and is worthy of the 

outer darkness; what should we do 

to him so that we save him from the 

punishments of the dragon of the 

outer darkness, so that he is returned 

to a righteous body which will find 

the mysteries of the Kingdom of the 

Light, and become good and go to 

the height, and inherit the Kingdom 

of the Light?132

Maria is wondering about the sta-

tus of condemned souls, or those who 

have sinned and also lacked the “mys-

teries” that are given to the elect. The 

condemned souls are deceased, for to 

reach the Kingdom of Light they must 

be “returned to a righteous body.” The “mysteries” 

to which Maria refers are of great importance in 

understanding the Lord’s response. Upon hearing 

the question, Christ responds:

If you want to return them from the punish-

ments of the outer darkness and all the judg-

ments, and return them to a righteous body 

which will find the mysteries of the light, and 

go to the height and inherit the Kingdom of 

Light—perform the one mystery of the Ineffable 

which forgives sins at all times. And when you have finished performing the mystery, say: “The 

soul of such and such a man on whom I think 

in my heart, when it comes to the place of the 

punishments of the chambers of the outer dark-

ness; or when it is in the rest of the punishments 

of the chambers of the outer darkness and the 

rest of the punishments of the dragon: may it be 

returned from them all. And when it finishes 

its number of cycles in the changes, may it be 

taken to the presence of the Virgin of Light; and 

may the Virgin of the Light seal it with the seal 

of the Ineffable, and cast it in that very month 

into a righteous body which will find the mys-

teries of the light in it, and become good, and 

go to the height and inherit the Kingdom of the 

Light. And furthermore, when it has completed 

the cycles of the changes, may that soul be taken 

to the presence of the seven virgins of the light 

which are in charge of (lit. over) the baptism. 

And may they place it (the baptism) upon that 

soul, and seal it with the sign of the Kingdom of 

the Ineffable, and may they take it to the ranks 

of the light.” . . . Truly, I say to you: the soul 

for which you shall pray, if indeed it is in the 

dragon of the outer darkness, it will withdraw 

its tail out of its mouth, and release that soul.133

The gnostic Christ tells Maria 

that the soul of an unrepentant man 

may reach the Kingdom of Light 

and be released from the place of 

punishments if certain procedures 

are undertaken in his name, mainly 

the “mystery of the Ineffable which 

forgives sins at all times.” A person 

on earth is to perform this mystery 

as a proxy for the deceased relative 

or friend; the living proxy merely 

thinks of that person while perform-

ing the rite and it will serve to release 

the person from outer darkness. The 

significance of this passage is that a 

living soul undergoes a certain rite, 

the mystery of the Ineffable (perhaps 

baptism as this rite is connected with 

forgiveness of sins), combined with 

prayer, which directly influences the 

salvation of a deceased soul; it is a 

proxy rite of the clearest nature. 

The Shepherd of Hermas teaches 

that the dead will receive baptism 

and hints at proxy work in a manner 

similar to the Pistis Sophia. In the 

apocalyptic visions, Hermas sees the 

apostles preaching to the spirits in 

the underworld. The text states, “They 

had to rise through water. . . in order 

to be made alive. In no other way 

could they enter the reign of God, 

unless they put off the deadliness of 

their [first] life. So too, those who 

had fallen asleep received the seal 

and [entered the reign of God]. Before bearing the name of [the Son of] God . . . a person 

is dead. But upon receiving the seal, the person puts 

aside deadliness and takes on life. So the seal is the 

water. Into the water they go down dead and come 

up alive. The seal was proclaimed to them, and they 

profited from it to enter into the reign of God.”134

In her commentary on this specific verse, Pro-

fessor Carolyn Osiek declares that “the association 

of passing through water with entering the kingdom 

of God (v. 2) and receiving the seal is unmistakably 

a reference to baptism; . . . the absolute necessity of 

baptism is implicit here [the dead included].”135

However the Shepherd of Hermas is not fin-

ished. Having learned this, he then asks, “Why, sir 

. . . did the forty stones rise with them from the 

depth already having the seal?” He is answered thus, 

These are the apostles and teachers who pro-

claimed the name of the Son of God, who, 

having fallen asleep in power and faith of the 

Son of God, even proclaimed to those who 

had previously fallen asleep and gave them the 

seal of the proclamation. They descended with 

them into the water and came up again, except 

that these descended alive and came up alive. 

Because of them, these others were enlivened 

and came to know the name of the Son of God. 

. . . They [those being baptized] fell asleep in 

justice and great purity, except they did not 

have this seal.136

The dead are given baptism at the hands of 

the apostles and teachers. Yet for some reason, the 

dead who are baptized and receive life have some 

forty people rise with them who already have the 

seal, or baptism. The wording “descended alive 

and came up alive” appears to indicate that these 

are souls who are already baptized. Could this be 

a reference to proxy baptisms? Osiek concludes: 

“These verses, without saying so, present a good 

argument in favor of baptism in the name of the 

dead, apparently already an act of piety in first-

century Corinth. . . . here with the pre-Christian 

dead, the problem is . . . they practiced virtue in 

their lives, but had not received baptism. Through 

the apostles and teachers, this problem is solved.”137 

The text is certainly vague enough to allow for the 

interpretation, and it seems interesting that the 

Shepherd of Hermas, a widely used text for early 

Christians, would contain such language. This is 

not conclusive evidence for vicarious baptisms, yet 

the texts reviewed indicate that some form of proxy 

work is possible and that it is related to the “rebirth” 

provided through baptism.

One thing is quite certain, however—nearly all 

the texts purporting to contain teachings of Christ 

concerning salvation for the dead emphasize that 

his teachings were closely guarded, reserved only 

for those whom the Lord deemed worthy to hear 

them.138 Indeed, of all the major themes presented 

in the texts, this one is quite pervasive. Because of 

this discretion, much remains unknown regarding 

the circulation and general understanding of these 

doctrines. Likely, few people had access to the texts 

that claim to contain the “hidden” teachings of the 

resurrected Lord. Hugh Nibley pointed out that 

much of Christ’s recorded teachings on important 

doctrinal topics—though only a fraction of what he 

taught139—remain shrouded in mystery,140 particu-

larly Christ’s teachings concerning salvation for the 

dead.141 Given this point, we should be appreciative 

of what evidence still exists. 

From the texts mentioned it seems clear that 

a belief among some early Christian communities 

was that the dead could be saved, perhaps through 

vicarious work, and that many of them would 

receive baptism. The ultimate question regards 

form: Were the baptisms to be performed vicari-

ously by the living on behalf of the dead, as was 

done historically by the groups previously men-

tioned (and as hinted at in some texts)? Or do these 

texts purport that baptism is received by the dead 

only in the afterlife, with no proxy or living agent 

involved? 

It appears, ultimately, that the Corinthians, or 

at least the reference to them in 1 Corinthians 15:29, 

inspired following generations of Christians to 

engage in vicarious ordinance work. In the remain-

ing section we will set forth evidence showing that 

such a practice was performed in ancient Christian-

ity and was more common than one might suppose. 

Marcionite and Gnostic Baptisms for 

the Dead

A favorite tactic of proxy nihilists is to associate 

the practice of vicarious baptism with later heretical 

groups and by so doing infer that the Corinthian 

practice was likewise heretical. One of the most 

oft-cited heretical groups is the Marcionites. Born around ad 100, Marcion was raised as a proto-

orthodox Christian by his father. Around ad 140, 

he entered Rome and converted many people to his 

own Christian theology, now quite distinct from 

other teachers of the time. It anticipated the teach-

ings of Gnosticism, with ideas of strict dualism 

within the universe and that Yahweh from the Old 

Testament was a demiurge. Because of Marcion’s 

success, he became a marked target for heresiolo-

gists (i.e., heretic hunters) of the orthodox faith,142

both contemporary and those far removed (such as 

Epiphanius). 

The Marcionite sect was completely estranged 

from proto-orthodox believers and met in their own 

communities rather than worship alongside other 

believers (as did the gnostics). According to Epipha-

nius (late fourth century), Marcion and his followers 

had stretched into the vast majority of the Christian 

world: “the sect is still to be found even now, in Rome 

and Italy, Egypt and Palestine, Arabia and Syria, 

Cyprus and the Thebaid—in Persia too moreover, 

and in other places.”143 Because of the widespread 

presence of the Marcionites, far more information 

about Marcion’s own teachings and practices has sur-

vived than that of relatively minor heretics.

One practice that sources attribute to Marcion 

and his followers is proxy baptism for the dead. 

John Chrysostom, in a homily concerning 1 Corin-

thians 15:29, states with amusement that the Mar-

cionites had perverted the expression “baptized for 

the dead”: 

Will ye that I should first mention how they 

who are infected with the Marcionite heresy 

pervert this expression? And I know indeed 

that I shall excite much laughter; nevertheless, 

even on this account most of all I will mention 

it that you may the more completely avoid this 

disease: viz., when any Catechumen departs 

among them, having concealed the living man 

under the couch of the dead, they approach the 

corpse and talk with him, and ask him if he 

wishes to receive baptism; then when he makes 

no answer, he that is concealed underneath 

saith in his stead that of course he should wish 

to be baptized; and so they baptize him instead 

of the departed, like men jesting upon the stage. 

So great power hath the devil over the souls of 

careless sinners.144

It appears that as late as the time of Chrysos-

tom (hence the present tense in his explanation of 

the Marcionite heresy), perhaps even in the early 

fifth century, followers of Marcion were practicing 

a form of proxy baptism for the dead. Chrysos-

tom suggests that they would only do baptisms for 

deceased catechumens, or those who were interested 

in baptism but died before receiving that ordi-

nance. It was thus reserved only for those who were 

intent on becoming baptized within the Marcionite 

community. 

Didymus the Blind (writing in the mid-fourth 

century) further substantiates this fact but with a 

slight difference in his description of the practice, 

saying, “The Marcionites baptized the living on 

behalf of dead unbelievers, not knowing that bap-

tism saves only the person who receives it.”145 Didy-

mus writes that Marcionites baptized for the souls 

of all unbelievers who had died without baptism, 

not just for those who were catechumens while yet 

alive. These textual discrepancies leave room for 

interpretation as to the exact nature of the practice, yet clearly the Marcionites were practicing such an 

act as late as the fourth century ad. 

If the practice of proxy baptism was fairly wide-

spread in the Marcionite communities throughout 

their history, then it would extend throughout the 

Near East and into nearly every area where Chris-

tian communities stretched during the first four 

centuries. Unlike other Christian sects that would 

normally worship right along with more “orthodox” 

believers, the Marcionites had such a large follow-

ing that they began to meet outside the confines of 

the “proto-orthodox” church, establishing their own 

religious communities or congregations. Marcion 

had so much success with his teachings146 that in 

many areas of Asia Minor they were the “original 

form of Christianity and continued for many years 

to comprise the greatest number of persons claim-

ing to be Christian (in those areas).”147

In his work Panarion, Epiphanius of Salamis, 

bishop of Cyprus in the late fourth century, men-

tions baptism for the dead performed vicariously 

in parts of Asia and Galatia. In a section entitled 

Against Cerinthians, he diverts from his main writ-

ing to provide information about proxy baptisms:

For their school (Cerinthians) reached its height 

in this country, I mean Asia, and in Galatia 

as well. And in these countries I also heard of 

a tradition which said that when 

some of their people died too soon, 

without baptism, others would be 

baptized for them in their names, so 

that they would not be punished for 

rising unbaptized at the resurrec-

tion and become the subjects of the 

authority that made the world. And 

the tradition I heard of says that this 

is why the same holy apostle said, “if 

the dead rise not at all, why are they 

baptized for them?”148

It is unclear whether Epiphanius 

meant the Cerinthian practice when 

speaking of baptisms for the dead, 

though one would assume that the Cerinthians were 

practicing the ordinance. Perhaps he was referring 

to the Marcionite practice that existed in that area 

during the time in which he was writing. Either 

way, his remarks provide further evidence that 

throughout Asia, or what would better be termed 

Asia Minor, and Galatia, proxy baptisms were being 

performed. His inclusion of the phrase subjects of 

the authority that made the world points to the fact 

that whether it was Marcionites, Cerinthians, or 

others who were performing this work, they were 

likely gnostics.149

Another interesting doctrine is that of proxy 

baptism by angels, a doctrine taught by Theodotus, 

a gnostic teacher who wrote in the later second to 

early third centuries ad. He is quoted by Clem-

ent of Alexandria as teaching that angels would be 

baptized for the souls of dead men. Apparently for 

Theodotus and the Valentinian tradition of Gnosti-

cism, “Baptism (played) a key role in the salvation 

of the elect.”150 Clement quotes Theodotus as saying, 

“And, they say, those who are baptized for the dead, 

these are the Angels who are baptized for us, so that, 

as we also possess the NAME, we are not bound by 

the Limit and the Cross, and prevented from entering 

Pleroma.”151 Theodotus seems to express that salva-

tion for the elect souls of the dead, whereby they may 

enter into Pleroma (fulness, light above this world), is 

achieved via proxy baptisms performed by angels of 

heaven. Although a variation on the current theme, 

it is important to note the similarity implicit in this 

teaching: proxy baptisms are necessary for the sal-

vation of the dead, and they must be performed by 

someone who is living (such as an angel).

Most commentators, though recognizing the 

fact that the Marcionites, as well as gnostic Chris-

tians,152 performed the rite of baptism for the dead, 

dismiss the practice because such groups are con-

sidered heretical sects of Christianity. However, the 

term heretical is used by the enemies of these early 

branches of Christianity: in scholarly work the term should hold no bearing on the legitimacy of the 

beliefs of the group nor upon the historical rele-

vance of their practices. The Marcionite, Cerinthian, 

and gnostic beliefs have just as much of a claim on 

Christian doctrine as do orthodox views; the only 

difference between the two is that one lasted far 

longer than the other. Simply because later church 

fathers rejected the practice in no way indicates 

that the primitive church or Christ himself rejected 

the beliefs concerning proxy ordinances. Too often 

Christian commentaries will dismiss baptism for 

the dead, specifically 1 Corinthians 15:29, because 

those who practiced the work were judged long after 

the fact to be “heretics.” This, according to their rea-

soning, is sound evidence that the early Christian 

church rejected the doctrine. By this same logic one 

could surmise that because the Marcionites, and 

all other “heretical” sects, practiced faith in Christ, 

then certainly the primitive church did not practice 

such foolish things. 

To understand early Christian doctrines, one 

must analyze the teachings of Jesus, the apostles, 

and early Christian literature. Early Christians 

didn’t always agree on doctrine. Orthodoxy is the 

Christian interpretation that eventually won out. 

On this basis, orthodoxy cannot claim to possess 

Christ’s original teachings:

It is widely thought today that proto-

orthodoxy was simply one of many compet-

ing interpretations of Christianity in the early 

church. It was neither a self-evident inter-

pretation nor an original apostolic view. The 

apostles, for example, did not teach the Nicene 

Creed or anything like it. Indeed, as far back 

as we can trace it, Christianity was remarkably 

varied in its theological expressions.153

Whether groups are gnostic, orthodox, Mar-

cionite, or whatever, one cannot use the term hereti-

cal to infer that all their teachings are incorrect. 

Rather, to judge whether a doctrine is plausibly 

connected with the teachings of Christ, the apostles, 

and early Christian theology, it must be based on 

historical evidence without reference to antagonis-

tic terms. Such callous proclamations do nothing 

to help us understand why certain groups accepted 

proxy ordinances, or whether it was reasonable for 

them to do so under Christian theology of the time. 

If, for instance, the Marcionite sect, or some 

other gnostic heresy, had outlasted the proto-

orthodox religion, then the current view of Chris-

tianity would be quite different. Our view of his-

tory, particularly of Christianity, is tainted by the 

categories of orthodoxy and heresy. On what basis 

do scholars or theologians judge which sects reflect 

the earliest teachings of Christ and his apostles 

concerning posthumous salvation and proxy 

ordinances? If it is based solely on the view of the 

sect that has outlasted the others, the so-called 

orthodox view, then methodologically their views 

are no more reputable than those of an untrained 

layperson. Instead, if modern methodology is to 

be observed, then it can be quite plausibly asserted 

that (1) Corinthian Saints practiced proxy baptisms 

on behalf of the dead, as did the Marcionites, and 

perhaps the Cerinthians and other gnostics, all of 

whom belong to Christian groups with claims of 

Christian doctrines; and that (2) given the historical 

nature of the practice,154 especially its early appear-

ance, proxy baptisms originated in the first century 

alongside the Christian faith. Whether the practice 

was widespread across the Christian world, or even 

among the apostles, is in no way clear. Mormons 

and non-Mormons alike must affirm that the scant 

amount of evidence and writings concerning the 

practice leaves a gap of information concerning its 

origin. Perhaps it did originate in Corinth, and later 

with Marcion. Yet perhaps the origin of the practice 

stems from Christ himself and the teachings of his 

apostles. If this were true, then proxy baptism may 

hold more weight than ever assumed in determin-

ing Christian doctrine of the earliest form. 

Conclusions

As has been shown, vicarious work for the 

deceased was a relatively common practice across a 

broad swath of the ancient Roman Empire. Diverse 

religious groups practiced various forms of proxy 

rites intended to improve the eternal condition 

of their deceased loved ones in their postmortal 

advancement. Given this background, it was quite 

natural for some first-century Christians to practice 

baptisms for the dead, as they faced the quandary of 

reconciling the infinite mercy of a loving God with 

the clearly stated and universally accepted Christian 

requirement of baptism for entrance into heaven, in 

light of the fact that many of their loved ones had 

not met this requirement. 
As historical evidence of the practice of baptism 

for the dead in the early Christian church, we sub-

mit the following, presented in detail throughout 

this article:

1. Both the New Testament and patristic literature 

apparently identify baptism as an absolute 

requisite of any soul desiring entrance into 

heaven. The Gospels, the book of Acts, and the 

Epistles all demonstrate that the Lord and his 

apostles actively extended baptism to every 

repentant soul and called upon every soul to 

repent and be baptized.

2. The most common reading of 1 Corinthians 

15:29 among modern biblical scholars is that it, 

in fact, refers to vicarious baptism for the dead 

among the Corinthian saints circa ad 56/57.

3. Early Christian writers, including Tertullian 

and Ambrosiaster, acknowledge that 

1 Corinthians 15:29 described vicarious baptism 

for the dead. Various Christian writers of the 

next few centuries thereafter also recognized 

this as fact, even though some of them 

denounced it as heresy.

4. Several New Testament passages and a plethora 

of apocryphal and gnostic writings support 

various themes related to vicarious baptism for 

the dead, including Christ’s descent into Sheol 

to preach to the dead, the need for baptism for 

the souls in Sheol, the efficacy of proxy work 

for the dead, and various forms of vicarious 

baptism for the dead, both by the living and by 

angels.

5. The Marcionites, a Christian sect that had a 

large following throughout much of the Roman 

Empire, practiced baptism for the dead from 

the late second or early third to the fourth 

century and possibly into the early fifth century 

ad. Some gnostic groups likewise practiced 

vicarious baptisms for the dead during the 

same period (but of shorter duration). They 

believed their practice continued a rite original 

to Christian belief.

6. These groups are labeled heretical today. While 

the victor writes the history book, which is true 

of both Christian and secular history, the victor 

is only the strongest combatant, not necessarily 

the most deserving. The modern methodology 

of historical research requires us to examine the 

historicity of the practices without the prejudice 

inherent in labels from one’s enemies.

Granted, the evidence is not watertight, just as there 

is a lack of incontrovertible evidence regarding the 

origins of many Christian doctrines. The simple fact 

is that few Christian documents survive from the 

first century, and so we should be appreciative and 

perhaps even surprised at the amount of attention 

given to vicarious baptism and related themes by 

the ancient writers.

But just as the lack of historical evidence is 

used by proxy nihilists to question the validity of 

the doctrine of baptism for the dead, the lack of 

historical records could just as well hide the fact 

that Christ himself taught this doctrine during his 

Forty-Day mission, or that baptisms for the dead 

were performed in numerous Christian communi-

ties, not just Corinth, under the auspices of the 

apostles. The fact is that we simply lack the histori-

cal evidence to determine these matters definitively.

Ultimately, every reader must ask: How can I 

reconcile the infinite mercy of a loving Heavenly 

Father with the Lord’s declaration that one can-

not enter heaven without baptism, in light of the 

fact that millions upon millions of good, honest 

individuals have lived their entire lives in various 

regions of the world without the opportunity to 

hear the good news of the atonement of our Lord 

Jesus Christ? 

Latter-day Saints practice baptism for the dead 

out of love for the deceased as they seek to extend 

to them the salvific gifts of Christ’s atonement. 

We recognize that vicarious ordinances can only 

be efficacious if the spirit on the other side of the 

veil accepts the ordinance performed on his or her 

behalf. This approach to the salvation of the dead, 

though not acceptable to many, demonstrates a self-

less dedication of time and effort to perform poten-

tially saving acts on behalf of the deceased. 

In the last part of this series, we will trace and 

explore the revelations that restored the doctrine of 

the redemption of the dead, including the resumption 

of vicarious ordinances for deceased loved ones.
