ADOIl OuTSIDE THE COSMOS

GOD bEFORE AND AFTER CREATION IN  THE ENOCHIC TRADITION

Andrei A. orlov

… vessels shattered and collapsed, for they were not able to contain the light expanding and emanating from within them … the saints in their death transform these sparks of holiness.

Chaim Vital, Etz Chaim

Unlike other early Enochic writings, the 2 (Slavonic) Apocalypse of Enoch depicts a unique story of primordial creation, revealing an elaborate course of events that preceded the visible creation of the world.1 The importance of this mystical account is underlined by the fact that it was delivered to the seventh antediluvian	hero	by	God	himself.	Chapter	25	of	2 Enoch recounts how, at the end	of	the	patriarch’s	celestial	tour	to	the	Throne	of	Glory,	the	deity	unveils	to the seer that prior to the visible creation he had called out from nothing the luminous aeon Adoil to become the foundation of the upper things. The account	describes	the	enigmatic	event	of	Adoil’s	disintegration	in	the	course	of which the aeon becomes the cornerstone of the visible creation upon which the Deity establishes his Throne. Here, similar to the depictions found in the Lurianic Kabbalah, the bursting of the primordial vessel of light is envisioned	as	the	first	creative	act	of	the	deity	that	gives	life	to	the	visible	order	of	everything.

Even more striking is that this primordial act of establishing the visible reality is then paralleled in the later chapters of the Slavonic apocalypse that focus on the eschatological demise.

Thus scholars have previously noted that the protological account in chapter	25,	dealing	with	the	establishment	of	the	created	order,	appears	to	correspond	with	the	order	of	eschatological	events	in	chapter	65	where	during his short visit to earth Enoch conveys to his children the mystery of the last times.2	The	patriarch	reveals	that	after	the	final	judgment	time	will	collapse and all the righteous of the world will be incorporated into one single luminous	entity: the	aeon	of	the	righteous.	The	description	of	this	final	aeon	betrays some striking similarities to the primordial aeon Adoil depicted in chapter	25.	The	revelation	also	seems	to	suggest	that	the	righteous	Enoch,	translated to heaven and transformed into a luminous celestial creature, represents	the	first	fruit	of	this	eschatological	aeon	that	will	eventually	gather	all	the righteous into a single entity.

The purpose of this chapter is to explore the traditions about the primordial aeon Adoil in the Slavonic apocalypse and the role of Enoch in its eschatological restoration.

THE AEON bEFORE CREATION

The Upper Foundation

The Slavonic apocalypse underlines the portentous nature of the primordial cosmogonic account by stressing that this special knowledge has never been previously revealed to any other creatures, including the angels. This supraangelic disclosure, given to the visionary after his celestial metamorphosis, can be seen as the pinnacle of the esoteric instruction the seventh antediluvian hero acquired in the upper realm. An extensive description of this revelation is provided by both the shorter and the longer recensions of the Slavonic text. The shorter recension3 of 2 Enoch	25	offers	the	following	account:

And	I	commanded	the	lowest	things:	“Let	one	of	the	invisible	things come out visibly!” And Adail descended, extremely large. And I looked at him, and, behold, in his belly he had a great age. And	I	said	to	him,	“Disintegrate	yourself,	Adail,	and	let	what	is	disintegrated from you become visible.” And he disintegrated himself, and there came out from him the great age. And thus it carried all the creation which I had wished to create. And I saw how good it was. And I placed for myself a throne, and I sat down on it. To the	light	I	spoke:	“You	go	up	higher	and	be	solidified	and	become	the foundation for the highest things.” And there is nothing higher than the light, except nothing itself. And I spoke, I straightened myself upward from my throne.4

The	central	character	of	the	story	is	the	aeon	Adoil	(“Adail”	in	the	shorter	recension)5 who is envisioned in the text as the chief cosmogonic agent responsible	for	the	“revelation”	of	the	visible	creation.	This	enigmatic	entity	is depicted as both the mother and the midwife of creation, someone that conceives and then releases the whole creation from its cosmic belly. The text emphasizes	the	enormous	size	of	Adoil,	defining	him	as	“extremely	large.”	He	is	portrayed	as	“pregnant”	with	creation	by	containing	a	great	aeon	in	his	stomach.	According	to	the	text,	Adoil’s	disintegration	provides	the	beginning for all visible reality and serves as the foundation on which God is able to establish	the	first	visible	manifestation	of	the	created	order:	his	Throne.	It	is	noteworthy that in both recensions the Deity commands Adoil to become the foundation of the highest things.6	This	terminological	identification	of	Adoil	with the concept of foundation is important for our study.7

Another	significant	feature	relevant	to	our	subsequent	discussion	is	the	portrayal	of	Adoil	in	the	longer	recension	as	the	“revealer.”8	Adoil’s	disintegration	is	identified	in	the	text	as	the	revelation	of	the	created	order:	“And	the	great age came out, and it revealed all the creation which I had thought up to create.”

Finally, another notable detail in the depiction of Adoil is the repeated references to his luminous nature. The emphasis on the luminosity of the primordial aeon is even more apparent in the longer recension, which emphasizes not only the outer shining nature of the protological agent but also his internal luminous state, depicted there as a pregnancy with great light.9

The cosmogony of 2 Enoch: light inside of light

Scholars have previously noted several parallels between the creational narrative found in the Slavonic apocalypse and some Hermetic and Gnostic cosmogonies. Futher, the researchers often envisioned 2 Enoch’s	account	as	an	important early testimony to the Jewish matrix of these later cosmogonic speculations.10	In	light	of	these	similarities,	scholars	speculated	that	Adoil’s	imagery may be connected with the myth of the Celestial Man. This imagery becomes prominent in the later Hermetic and Gnostic texts and collections,11 including the Corpus Hermeticum where the Anthropos inherits the luminosity of the Father12 and becomes the blueprint for the created order and humankind by disintegrating himself into the physical realm. This motif is conveyed in the Poimandres13 through the erotic metaphor of Anthropos falling in love with Nature.14 In commenting on the features of the Celestial Man myth in the story of Adoil, Jarl Fossum draws attention to the peculiar symbolism of light conveyed in the longer recension of the Slavonic pseudepigraphon through the	expression	“light	out	of	light.”	He	proposes	that	this	imagery	of	light	–	possibly rendered in the Greek Vorlage of 2 Enoch	through	the	term	φῶς,	as	in	many	other	accounts	that	contain	the	Celestial	Man	ideology	–	might	have	an	anthropomorphic	significance.15 It is well known that the heavenly Anthropos traditions	often	play	on	the	ambiguity	of	the	φως	terminology	that	can	designate	either	φώς	“a	man”	or	φῶς	“light,”	both	pointing	to	the	luminous	and	anthropomorphic nature of the Celestial Human.16 In view of these conceptual developments, Adoil can be understood in the Slavonic apocalypse as an anthropomorphic entity that is predestined to serve not only as the pattern of the visible creation but also as the blueprint of humanity. The possible “human”	form	of Adoil	seems	also	reaffirmed	in	both	recensions	through	references to his belly.

The	anthropomorphic	dimension	of	the	φως	symbolism	was	also	evident	in	the Hermetic and Gnostic cosmologies that also often play on the ambiguity of this terminology in their depiction of the Heavenly Man. In this respect it is intriguing that some Gnostic anthropogonies use expressions very similar to 2 Enoch	by	describing	the	Celestial	Man	“Adamas”	as	“a	light	which	radiated	from the light.”17

The anthropogony of 2 Enoch: sophia and seven

The enigmatic unfolding of the cosmogonic process in the Slavonic apocalypse receives further conceptual development in the account of the creation of Adam that follows this narration. Interestingly, the cosmogonic account of	Adoil’s	disintegration	in	chapters	25–7	and	the	anthropogonic	account	of	Adam’s	creation	found	in	chapter	30	appear	to	be	closely	connected	with	each	other,	as	some	of	Adam’s	qualities	resemble	some	peculiar	features	of	the	great aeon.

One	of	the	prominent	features	here	is	a	parallel	between	the	luminosity	of Adoil and the luminosity of Adam. Thus, according to 2 Enoch 30.12, the prelapsarian Adam was a very special celestial being. The Slavonic apocalypse defines	him	as	a	second	angel	who	was	great and glorious.18

The	designation	of	Adam	as	a	“second	angel”	is	also	intriguing	in	light	of	previous scholarly suggestions that Adoil too appears to be envisioned in the text as an angel.19	In	view	of	the	possible	angelic	nature	of	the	first	aeon,	Adam’s	designation	as	the	second	angel	may	have	been	conceived	as	a	subtle link between the two characters by placing the patriarch in parallel with the Heavenly Man. Additional imagery found in the text seems to corroborate this	connection.	In	this	respect	it	is	noteworthy	that	the	account	of	Adam’s	creation	ends	with	an	arcane	hymn	about	the	two	“substances”	of	humanity	–	invisible and visible:

From invisible and visible substances I created man.

From both his natures come both death and life.

And	(as	my)	image	he	knows	the	word	like	(no)	other	creature. But even at his greatest he is small, and again at his smallest he is great.20

In light of this juxtaposition of the invisible and the visible, it is worth noting that the descent of Adoil in both recensions of 2 Enoch	25.1	is	rendered	through similar terminology, as transition from an invisible into a visible condition:	“And	I	commanded	the	lowest	things:	‘Let	one	of	the	invisible	things	descend	visibly!’	And	Adoil	descended,	extremely	large.”21

Moreover, the aforementioned hymn makes an enigmatic juxtaposition between the invisible and visible substances of the Protoplast and the conditions of death and life, which possibly signify here the states of mortality and immortality:	“From	invisible	and	visible	substances	I	created	man.	From	both	his natures come both death and life.”

It is striking that Poimandres	15	offers	a	very	similar	cluster	of	traditions	about the twofold nature of humankind, in which the immortal part is linked with	the	Celestial	Man:	“Because	of	this,	unlike	any	other	living	thing	on	earth,	mankind	is	twofold	–	in	the	body	mortal	but	immortal	in	the	essential	man.”22

All these parallels help to clarify the subtle correlations between Adoil and Adam, providing further insight into the relationships between 2 Enoch’s	cosmogony and anthropogony.

The unity of the cosmological and anthropological developments in the Slavonic apocalypse is also evident in the tradition about the sevenfold nature of humanity. The longer recension of 2 Enoch	30.8–9	recounts	that	Adam	was	created	from	seven	“components”23	and	endowed	with	seven	“properties/

faculties”:24

And on the sixth day I commanded my wisdom to create man out of the seven components:

his	flesh	from	earth;

his	blood	from	dew	and	from	the	sun; his	eyes	from	bottomless	sea; his	bones	from	stone;

his	reason	from	the	mobility	of	angels	and	from	clouds; his	sinews	and	hair	from	grass	of	the	earth; his spirit from my spirit and from wind.

And I gave him 7 properties:25 hearing	to	the	flesh; sight	to	the	eyes; smell	to	the	spirit; touch	to	the	sinews; taste	to	the	blood;

to	the	bones	–	endurance; to	the	reason	–	sweetness.26

The creation of Adam from seven substances is important for our study. It is again reminiscent of the Hermetic and Gnostic developments where the seven fold anthropogonic pattern is intertwined with the sevenfold cosmogony.

For example, in Poimandres 16-17 the following cryptic tradition can be found:

Poimandres said:	“This	is	the	mystery	that	has	been	kept	hidden	until this very day. When nature made love with the man, she bore a wonder most wondrous. In him he had the nature of the cosmic framework	of	the	seven,	who	are	made	of	fire	and	spirit,	as	I	told	you, and without delay nature at once gave birth to seven men, androgyne and exalted, whose nature were like those of the seven governors …

 As	I	said,	then,	the	birth	of	the	seven	was	as	follows.	<Earth>	was	the female. Water did the fertilizing. Fire was the maturing force. Nature took spirit from the ether and brought forth bodies in the shape of the man. From life and light the man become soul and mind;	from	life	came	soul,	from	light	came	mind,	and	all	things	in	cosmos	of	the	senses	remained	thus	until	a	cycle	ended	<and>	kinds of things began to be.”27

Here	humanity’s	origin	is	traced	to	the	seven	spirits28 who are responsible for	“giving	birth”	to	the	seven	androgynous	humans.29

It is also intriguing that in Poimandres 16-17 the sevenfold anthropogony corresponds	to	the	sevenfold	cosmology	(wherein	the	seven	proto-humans	are	correlated	to	the	seven	celestial	governors’-planets	called	“administrators”)	and	also	to	the	“senses”	or	elements	of	nature	and	the	human	body.	Thus a passage in Poimandres	9	tells	about	seven	planetary	“governors,”	applying	to	them	the	terminology	of	“circles”:

The mind who is god, being androgyne and existing as life and light, by speaking gave birth to a second mind, a craftsman, who, as	god	of	fire	and	spirit,	crafted	seven	governors;	they	encompass	the	sensible	world	in	circles	(ἐν	κύκλοὶς),	and	their	government	is	called faith.30

The	symbolism	of	the	planetary	“circles”	in	this	passage	is	reminiscent	of	the imagery in the Slavonic apocalypse. A tradition found in the longer recension of 2 Enoch 27.3–4	speaks	of	God	creating	seven	great	“circles”	in	the	“foundation of light”:

And I made a foundation of light around the water. And I created seven great circles inside it, and I gave them an appearance of crystal, wet and dry, that is to say glass and ice, and to be the circuit for water and the other elements. And I pointed out to each one of them his route, to the seven stars, each one of them in his own heaven, so that they might travel accordingly. And I saw how good it was. And I made a division between the light and between the darkness, that is to say, in the middle of the waters, this way and that way. And I said to the light that it should be day, and to the darkness I commanded that it should be night. And evening came, and	again	morning	came,	that	is	the	first	day.31

In this passage, the creation of the seven planetary circles and seven stars appears to be connected, as in the Corpus Hermeticum, with the sevenfold nature	of	primordial	humanity.	Our	study	will	later	show	that	in	the	account	of	Adam’s	creation	in	2 Enoch 30, the list of the seven planets is given immediately	before	the	account	of	the	Protoplast’s	creation	from	the	seven	components.	Here,	as	in	the	Hermetic	literature,	the	seven	“governors”	of	the	heavens	appear	to	be	envisioned	as	the	defining	cosmological	pattern	that	precedes the sevenfold nature of primordial humanity.

A similar correspondence between the sevenfold cosmology and the sevenfold anthropogony appears in several Gnostic texts, including the Apocryphon of John,	where	the	seven	components	of	Adam’s	body	correspond	to	the	seven	anthropogonic agents associated with planetary spheres and responsible for the	fashioning	of	the	first	human’s	body.32

Thus the Apocryphon of John unveils the identities of seven rulers and their role in the creation of the psychic body of Adam:

And the rulers created seven powers for	(each	of)	them,	and	the	powers created for themselves six angels for each one until they became	365	angels.	And	these	are	the	bodies	belonging	with	the	names:	the	first	<is>	Athoth,	he	has	a	sheep’s	face;	the	second	is	Eloaiou,	he	has	a	donkey’s	face;	the	third	is	Astaphaios,	he	has	a	[hyena’s]	face;	the	fourth	is	Yao,	he	has	a	[serpent’s]	face	with	seven	heads;	the	fifth	is	Sabaoth,	he	has	a	serpent’s	face;	the	sixth	is	Adonin,	he	had	a	monkey’s	face;	the	seventh	is	Sabbede,	he	has	a	shining	fire-face.	This	is	the	sevenness	of	the	week.33

…	And	he	said	to	the	authorities	which	attend	him,	“Come,	let	us	create a man according to the image of God and according to our likeness, that his image may become a light for us.” And they created through their respective powers in correspondence with the characteristics which were given. And each authority supplied a characteristic by means of the form of the image which he had seen	in	its	psychic	(form).	He	created	a	being	according	to	the	likeness	of	the	first,	perfect	Man.

 And	they	said,	“Let	us	call	him	Adam,	that	his	name	may	become	a	power	of	light	for	us.”	And	the	powers	began	(to	create):	the	first	one,	Goodness,	created	a	bone-soul;	and	the	second,	Providence,	created	a	sinew-soul;	the	third,	Divinity,	created	a	flesh-soul;	and	the	fourth,	Lordship,	created	a	marrow-soul;	the	fifth,	Kingdom,	created	a	blood-soul;	the	sixth,	Envy,	created	a	skin-soul;	the	seventh, Understanding, created a hair-soul. And the multitude of the angels attended him, and they received from the authorities the seven substances of the soul in order to create the proportions of the limbs and the proportions of the trunk and the proper working together of each of the parts.34

Here, as in the aforementioned Hermetic materials, the correspondence between	the	Heavenly	Man	and	his	“material”	counterpart	is	mediated	by	the	anthropogonic	sevenfold	pattern.	Several	other	Gnostic	texts	also	affirm	this	tradition	of	the	seven	androgynous	anthropogonic	“mediators.”	Thus,	for	example, On the Origin of the World	16–17	reads:

Seven appeared in chaos, androgynous. They have their masculine names	and	their	feminine	names	…	These	are	the	[seven]	forces	of	the	seven	heavens	of	[chaos].	And	they	were	born	androgynous,	consistent with the immortal pattern that existed before them, according to the wish of Pistis.35

Here again, as in the aforementioned passages from the Poimandres, the connection is made between the seven androgynes and the sevenfold pattern	according	to	which	they	were	“born.”	While	the	list	of	the	corresponding celestial governing planets is not explicitly outlined in the versions of the 

Apocryphon of John, their authors knew these astral correlations.36

Roelof van den Broek summarizes the correspondences found in the several versions of the Apocryphon of John	by	offering	the	following	juxtaposition	of archons, powers, planets, and soul substances:37

Iaoth Pronoia  Moon Marrow Eloaios Divinity Mercury Bones Astaphaios Goodness Venus Sinews

Iao 	Fire 	Sun 	Flesh

Sabaoth Kingship Mars Blood Adoni Synesis Jupiter Skin

Sabbataios 	Sophia 	Saturn 	Hair38

These correlations are thought-provoking as they show close similarities with the planetary list given in the creational narrative of the Slavonic apocalypse. It is also intriguing that in 2 Enoch this planetary list precedes almost immediately the rosters of the seven components and properties of Adam. Thus the longer recension of 2 Enoch	30.2–3	relates:

And	on	the	fourth	day	I	commanded:	“Let	there	be	great	lamps	on	the	heavenly	circles.”	On	the	first,	the	highest	circle,	I	placed	the	star	Kronos;

on	the	2nd, <lower	down,	I	placed>			Afridit;

on	the	3rd		Arris;

on	the	4th		the	sun;

on	the	5th		Zeous;

on	the	6th		Ermis;

and on the 7th, the lowest 	the moon.39

Although some Greek names on this planetary list appear to have been corrupted during the long transmission history of the Slavonic apocalypse,40 it is not	difficult	to	restore	their	original	forms.

The corrupted Greek names given in the list correspond to the following planets:41

1st	circle	–	Saturn	(Kronos)

2nd	circle	–	Venus	(Aphrodite)

3rd	circle	–	Mars	(Ares) 4th	circle	–	the	sun

5th	circle	–	Jupiter	(Zeus)

6th	circle	–	Mercury	(Hermes)

7th	circle	–	the	moon

This list is reminiscent of the planetary list of the Archons provided by van der Broek, although it misplaces Jupiter and Venus42 and reverses the order of	planets,	starting	with	Saturn	(Kronos)	and	concluding	with	the	moon.	Van	den	Broek	notes	that,	according	to	Origen’s	Against Celsus 6.31, this reversal of the	planetary	order	was	part	of	the	Ophites’	cosmological	system.43

The cluster of traditions surrounding the creation of the Protoplast in the Slavonic apocalypse, similarly to the Gnostic and Hermetic materials, points to the unity of the cosmological and anthropogonic speculations which are tied together through the distinctive sevenfold patterns. Although the applications of the sevenfold patterns in relation to humanity have been known in various Hellenistic milieux from the most ancient times, the peculiar nature of these developments in the Slavonic apocalypse appears to draw them closer to the variants found in later Hermetic and Gnostic texts.

In this respect another, even more striking parallel between the account of creation in 2 Enoch 30 and the Gnostic materials should be mentioned. In the longer recension44 of 2 Enoch	30.8	the	deity	commanded	his	Wisdom45 to create man out the seven components.46 Scholars have previously noted the parallels between	this	role	of	Wisdom	(Gk.	Sophia)	in	the	creation	of	the	first	human	in	the Slavonic apocalypse and the Gnostic texts.47 Some scholars even suggested that the Sophia tradition in 2 Enoch 30 might be an early Jewish prototype of the later Gnostic developments.48

Although in the Poimandres’ version of the anthropogonic myth Nature is responsible for the creation of the seven androgynous beings, in some Nag Hammadi	materials it	is	Sophia	(“Wisdom”)49 that generates the immortal sevenfold pattern, the portentous blueprint later imitated in the seven androgynous archons.50	She	is	also	one	of	the	seven	“powers”	–	the	entity	corresponding to the name of archon Sabbataios on the lists of rulers in the Apocryphon of John. It is intriguing that, as in the Slavonic apocalypse where wisdom is in charge of the sevenfold pattern, in Gnostic and some other related materials Sophia also takes charge of the seven entities responsible for the	creation	of	the	first	human.

Thus On the Origin of the World	16–17	reads:

Seven appeared in chaos, androgynous … And they were born androgy nous, consistent with the immortal pattern that existed before them,	according	to	the	wish	of	Pistis	(Sophia):	so	that	the	likeness	of what had existed since the beginning might reign to the end.51

Here	Wisdom	(Sophia)	is	put	in	charge	of	the	“immortal”	sevenfold	pattern	according to which the seven androgynous archons are brought into existence. The Hypostasis of the Archons 3–4	offers	a	very	similar	tradition	that	puts	Sophia in charge of the sevenfold pattern which lays the basis for the creation of humankind.52

The Sophia tradition found in the Slavonic apocalypse may indeed be one of the most veiled conceptual developments in the text. The true extent of this enigmatic demiurgic entity assisting the deity in his creation remains shrouded in mystery. It is possible that in 2 Enoch Sophia is linked not only with fashioning the sevenfold human body but also with generating the seven celestial	“governors.”	It	is	intriguing	that	in	chapter	48	Enoch,	while	outlining	the	process	of	the	creation	of	celestial	bodies,	mentions	that	they	were	“fixed”	by	God’s	own	wisdom.53

In concluding this section dealing with protological developments, we should	again	highlight	the	prominence	of	the	sevenfold	patterns	in	the	text’s	cosmological and anthropological developments. While many sevenfold list found in the Slavonic apocalypse appear to have been irreparably corrupted during	the	text’s	long	journey	through	various	religious	and	linguistic	milieux, these sevenfold patterns represent the paramount link connecting the protological narrative with its eschatological counterpart, where the seven- fold blue print will again play a vital role.

THE AEON AFTER CREATION

The final aeon as the reverse anthropogony

It is time to return to the tradition of the primordial aeon in the Slavonic apocalypse. The aforementioned primeval account of creation, narrated by God in chapters	25	and	26 of	the	Slavonic	pseudepigraphon, is	invoked	in	abbreviated form in the subsequent chapters of the text where Enoch unveils to his sons the knowledge he received during his celestial trip. There the reader also encounters some additional cosmological details pertaining not only to the beginning	of	creation	but	also	its	final	destiny.

Chapter	65	of	2 Enoch	deals	with	the	final	instructions	the	translated	hero	of	the	faith	relates	to	humanity	immediately	before	his	second	and	final	departure	to	heaven.	The	final	place	of	this	revelation	among	the	other	mysteries conveyed by Enoch to humankind during his short visit underlines the significance	of	this	disclosure.	In	many	ways	it	appears	to	be	set	in	parallel	with	the	account	of	the	Lord’s	own	instructions	about	the	secrets	of	creation,	which Enoch also received from the Deity at the end of his heavenly trip after the preliminary revelations conveyed to him by his psychopomps and angel Vereveil.

This enigmatic revelation is intriguing not only in the format of its delivery which parallels the secrets of creation revealed by the Lord in previous chapters	25	and	26	but	also	in	its	peculiar	content which in many ways mirrors the familiar conceptual framework of the protological revelation. The shorter recension of 2 Enoch	65.1–11	reads:

Listen,	my	children!	Before	all	things	existed,	(and)	before	all	creation came about, the Lord established the age of creation, and after that he created all his creation, visible and invisible … When the whole creation which the Lord has created, shall come to an end, and	when	each	person	will	go	to	the	Lord’s	great	judgment,	then	the time periods will perish, and there will be neither years nor months	nor	days,	and	hours	will	no	longer	be	counted;	But	they	will constitute a single age.54 And all the righteous, who escape from	the	Lord’s	great	judgment,	will	be	collected	together	with	the	great	age.	And	<the	age>	at	the	same	time	will	unite	with	the	righteous, and they will be eternal. And there will be among them neither	weariness	nor	suffering	nor	affliction	nor	expectation	of	violence nor the pain of the night nor darkness. But they will have a	great	light	for	eternity,	<and>	an	indestructible	wall,	and	they	will have a great paradise, the shelter of an eternal residence. How happy	are	the	righteous	who	will	escape	the	Lord’s	great	judgment, for their faces will shine forth like the sun.”55

The patriarch begins his narration with references to the familiar theme of	the	primeval	aeon	already	encountered	in	chapter	25.	These	protological	events are then set in parallel with the chain of eschatological actions that, according to the authors of the apocalypse, will reintegrate the remnant of the	creation	–	an	elite	group	of	humans	–	into	a	single	aeon	which	will	collect all the righteous of the world.56	The final	consummation	of	all	creation	into a single aeon recalls the initial protological disintegration of Adoil who once gave birth to the multiplicity of created forms.57	It	appears	that	the	final	consummation	of	the	created	order	“reverses”	its	protological	unfolding	in	such	a	way	that	reintegration	into	the	final	aeon	invokes	memory	of	the	disintegration of the primeval aeon Adoil. In comparison with the cosmogonic character of the primeval aeon, the last aeon though has distinctive anthropogonic features. In this respect it seems that the reverse cosmogenesis of the last days also presupposes the reversal of the anthropogonic process in the course of which the righteous of the world and their exemplar, the seventh antediluvian hero, inherit some qualities of the prelapsarial Adam and some distinctive features of his cosmogonic blueprint, the primordial aeon Adoil. Here, unlike in many other Jewish accounts of the last days, the eschatological humanity does not simply regain the original state of the Protoplast, instead returning to the condition of the immaterial Anthropos, that is, the anthropomorphic primordial aeon, Adoil. The text also seems to suggest that the righteous Enoch, translated to heaven and transformed into a luminous celestial creature,	represents	the	first	fruit	of	this	eschatological	aeon	that	will	eventually gather all the righteous into one single entity.

The beloved seventh

It	has	already	been	noted	that	chapter	65	of	the	Slavonic	apocalypse	provides	a	striking	description	of	the	final	age.	Yet	some	details	about	the	eschatological entity can also be found in the longer recension of the following chapter of 2 Enoch	(chapter	66)	where	the	seventh	antediluvian	patriarch	tells	his	children	about	the	sevenfold	nature	of	the	final	aeon.	2 Enoch	66.6–8	relates:

Walk	my	children	in	long-suffering	…	having	love	for	one	another,	until	you	go	out	from	this	age	of	suffering,	so	that	you	may	become	inheritors of the never-ending age. How happy are the righteous who	shall	escape	the	Lord’s	great	judgment;	for	they	will	be	made	to shine seven times brighter than the sun. For in that age everything	is	estimated	sevenfold	–	light	and	darkness	and	food	and	enjoyment and misery and paradise and tortures.58

This	tradition	about	the	sevenfold	nature	of	the	final	age	is	intriguing	in	that it recalls the familiar cluster of the sevenfold patterns permeating the anthropogony	of	the	Slavonic	apocalypse	–	the	feature	discussed	in	detail	in	the	first	part	of	our	investigation.

In	light	of	the	“anthropogonic”	nature	of	the	final	age	–	described	in	the	Slavonic	apocalypse	as	the	final	abode	of	perfected	humanity,	the	gathering	place	of	the	righteous	–	invocation	of	the	details	of	the	Protoplast’s	creation	does not seem entirely inappropriate. Unlike some Gnostic texts where the seven	elements	of	Adam’s	corporeality	are	linked	to	the seven	infamous	anthropogonic	agents	responsible	for	fashioning	Adam’s	psychic	body,	in	the	Slavonic	apocalypse Wisdom creates, out of seven properties, the perfect human being whom the text describes as the great and glorious celestial creature.

The	sevenfold	nature	of	the	final	age	inhabited	by	perfected	humanity	thus	invokes the perfect sevenfold nature of the Protoplast before his fall. This connection seems to be further strengthened in the initial verses of chapter 65	where	Enoch	relates	to	his	children	the	mystery	of	the	final	aeon.	There	some	peculiar	details	of	the	Protoplast’s	creation	are	invoked,	including	the	

elements	of	the	sevenfold	pattern	of	his	“properties.”

Thus in 2 Enoch	65.1–2	the	patriarch	says	the	following:

Listen, my children! Before ever anything existed, and before ever any created thing was created, the Lord created the whole of his creation, visible and invisible. And however much time there was went by. Understand how, on account of this, he constituted man in his own form, in accordance with a similarity. And he gave him

	 	eyes 	to see,

 	and ears 	to hear,  	and heart 	to think,  	and reason 	to argue.

And the Lord set everything forth for the sake of man, and he created the whole of creation for his sake.59

It is interesting that in this passage the details of the primordial cosmogony and anthropogony are closely tied together.

The	seventh	antediluvian	hero’s	peculiarly	selective	memory,	which	strives	to bring together the account of the great aeon Adoil and the story of the Protoplast’s	creation,	points	to	the	importance	of	this	conceptual	correlation	for	understanding	the	mystery	of	the	sevenfold	final	aeon,	which	is	predestined to shelter transformed humanity now returning to its original condition.

Further, it appears that the connection of the seventh antediluvian hero with	this	sevenfold	pattern	of	the	final	age	is	not	coincidental	either.	It	is	possible that here, as in many other Enochic texts, the seventh human being is envisioned	as	the	first	fruit	of	perfected	humanity	predestined	to	return	to	its original prelapsarian condition. The proleptic account of this portentous return is described in detail in chapter 22 of the Slavonic apocalypse where the seventh antediluvian hero undergoes a dramatic metamorphosis that transforms	him	into	a	glorious	celestial	being	–	a	creature	identical	in	its	luminous nature to the Protoplast.

Therefore it does not seem coincidental that the return to the original state of	humankind,	once	endowed	with	the	sevenfold	pattern	of	“components”	and	“properties,”	is	executed	through	the seventh	human	being.

The portentous place of the seventh human, overshadowed by his unique role	in	restoring	the	condition	of	the	first	human,	is	known	in	many	ancient	interpretive traditions. In this respect, it is noteworthy that in the story of the seventh antediluvian hero one encounters another, even more ancient, Mesopotamian version of the sevenfold anthropogony, namely, the primordial myth about seven proto-humans, known in Mesopotamian pantheons as apkallu.60 The apkallu61 appear to be envisioned as agents responsible for bringing humanity to perfection through education and transmission of celestial knowledge. In a way, these seven apkallu might be seen as the spiritual entities standing behind the seven antediluvian heroes. Scholars have previously noted the connections between the apkallu traditions and the Sumerian King List	–	the	roster	where	a	prototype	of	Enoch,	the	seventh	antediluvian	king	Enmeduranki, plays an important role.62 The Enmeduranki traditions often describe	the	seventh	antediluvian	hero	as	the	“beloved”	of	the	great	gods.63 This tradition about the special place of the seventh human as the chosen vessel of the upper realm was not lost or forgotten during the long theological history of the seventh antediluvian hero. Thus even later rabbinic materials	often	apply	the	same	title	to	Enoch,	designating	him	as	the	“Beloved	Seventh.”64

Enoch as the righteous one

It	does	not	seem	coincidental	that	the	portentous	revelation	about	the	final	aeon of the righteous comes from the mouth of the seventh antediluvian patriarch, the hero known in Jewish lore for his exemplary righteousness. In light	of	this	connection,	the	motif	of	Enoch’s	righteousness	should	be	examined	more	closely.	The	epithet	“righteous	man”	becomes	an	important	designation of the seventh antediluvian hero already in the beginning of his story, where his righteousness is juxtaposed with the wickedness of the antediluvian generation and the transgressions of the Watchers.

Already	in	the	very	first	verses	of	one	of	the	earliest	Enochic	booklets,	the	Book of the Watchers,	the	patriarch	is	defined	as	a	righteous	man.65 In 1 Enoch 15.11	the	same	designation	comes	now	from	the	mouth	of	the	Deity	himself:	“And	he	answered	me	and	said	to	me	with	his	voice:	Hear!	Do	not	be	afraid,	Enoch,	(you)	righteous	man	and	scribe	of	righteousness.”66 Besides the patriarch’s	exemplary	behavior,	which	allowed	him	to	become	the	paragon	of	righteousness for future generations, this passage also points to another important	office	of	the	seventh	antediluvian	hero	as	the	teacher	of	righteousness	–	an	office	in	which	he	was	desperately	attempting	to	rescue	and	sustain	the moral and cosmological order of the antediluvian world by delivering oracles of doom and calls to repentance which he received from God and angels.67 Early Enochic materials, 1 Enoch	12.4	and	15.11,	thus	repeatedly	define	him	as	the scribe of righteousness.

It	is	quite	possible	that	Enoch’s	connection	with	the eschatological	destiny	of the righteous may be already ascertained in the early Enochic writings. According to 1 Enoch,	the	patriarch	travels	to	the	enigmatic	location	“the	paradise of righteousness,” which might represent here another designation for the eschatological gathering of the righteous.

Enoch-Metatron as the foundation

It has already been noted that, in the protological account dealing with the creation of the world, Adoil is depicted as the foundation of visible things, both earthly and heavenly, including the very seat of the Deity, His Throne. In view	of	the	aforementioned	parallelism	between	the	descriptions	of	the	first	and	last	aeons,	it	appears	that	the	“eschatological	age”	is	also	connected	with	the idea of the foundation. Although the description of the eschatological gathering of the righteous does not directly refer to this entity as the foundation, the idea is evident in the text through several implicit details.

In	commenting	on	the	identification	of	the	final	aeon	with	the	righteous,	Moshe Idel notes that in Jewish mysticism the righteous are often portrayed as the cosmological foundation of the world.68 He points to the tradition found in b. Hag. 12b, where the righteous are depicted as the cosmological foundation of the world:69

It is taught: R. Jose says: Alas for people that they see but know not what they see, they stand but know not on what they stand. What does	the	earth	rest	on?	On	the	pillars,	for	it	is	said:	Who	shaketh	the earth out of her place, and the pillars thereof tremble … But the	Sages	say:	[The	world]	rests	on	twelve	pillars,	for	it	is	said:	He	set the borders to the peoples according to the number [of the tribes]	of	the	children	of	Israel.	And	some	say	seven	pillars,	for	it	is	said;	she	hath	hewn	out	her	seven	pillars.70 R. Eleazar b. Shammua says:	[It	rests]	on	one	pillar,	and	its	name	is	“Righteous,”	for	it	is	said:	But	“Righteous”	is	the	foundation	of	the	world.71

It	is	no	coincidence	that	the	“revealer”	and	the	“first	fruit”	of	the	eschatological	aeon	–	the	righteous	Enoch	–	also	appears	to	be	conceived	in	some	pseudepigraphical and rabbinic accounts as the pillar or foundation of the world.

As has already been noted, early Enochic booklets seek to highlight the contrast between the righteousness of Enoch and the unrighteousness of the antediluvian	generation,	in	which	the	Watchers’	interference	causes	moral	and cosmological collapse leading the environment and the human race toward an imminent catastrophe. In the protological mishap leading to the annihilation	of	the	earth’s	inhabitants	in the	waters	of	the	Flood,	one	might	see a proleptic reenactment of the eschatological collapse of the last days where the seventh antediluvian hero is also predestined to play an important role.	In	this	catastrophic	chain	of	events	affecting	the	whole	fabric	of	creation, Enoch can be seen as the righteous one who attempts to sustain the created order, in many ways serving as the pillar of the antediluvian world. This important role of the seventh antediluvian hero as the sustainer and protector	of	creation	is	reaffirmed	in	the	Book of Jubilees that depicts the patriarch as the cosmic dam against the waters of the Flood.72

Enoch’s	role	as	an	entity	sustaining	the	world	was	not	forgotten	in	later	Jewish	materials.	Idel’s	research	identifies	an	important	tradition,	preserved	in later Jewish mysticism, that portrays the seventh antediluvian hero as the foundation	which	sustains	the	world:	“the	righteous	is	the	foundation	of	the	world.	For	[the	sake	of ]	one	[single]	righteous	the	world	is	maintained	and	it	is	Enoch	the	son	of	Yared.”73	It	is	apparent	that	the	author(s)	of	this	tradition,	which might stem from the early Enochic literature, were informed by the extra-biblical roles and actions of the seventh patriarch, who served there as the	pillar	of	the	world	attempting	to	sustain	creation’s	moral	and	cosmological order in the turmoil of the antediluvian generation.

This understanding of Enoch as the foundation of the world is not atypical	in	Jewish	mystical	lore	where	the	patriarch’s	heavenly	counterpart,	the	supreme angel Metatron, was traditionally understood as the force sustaining	the	world.	These	cosmological	functions	were	exhibited	first	in	Metatron’s	role as the governor or the prince of the world74	(שר העולם),	an	office	already	discernable in 2 Enoch75 and further developed in Hekhalot mysticism, including traditions found in Sefer Hekhalot.76	It	is	intriguing	that	Enoch-Metatron’s	governance of the world includes not only administrative functions but also the duty of the physical sustenance of the world. Moshe Idel refers to the treatise The Seventy Names of Metatron where the angel and God seize the world in their hands.77 This motif of the Deity and his vice-regent grasping the universe in their cosmic hands invokes the conceptual developments found in the Shiʿur Qomah and Hekhalot materials, where Enoch-Metatron possesses a cosmic corporeality comparable to the physique of the Deity and is depicted as the measurement of the divine Body.78

In light of these traditions, it seems possible that already in the Slavonic apocalypse the authors try to portray Enoch as the eschatological foundation of the world79	who	already	participates	in	the	final	aeon	of	the	righteous	and	can	thus	be	seen	as	the	first	fruit	of	this	eschatological	gathering.	In	this	respect, like Adoil who anticipates the protological aeon that gives to all creation its beginning, Enoch too anticipates the future eschatological aeon when the creation will collapse and all the righteous will be united together. Both Adoil and Enoch can therefore be seen as outstanding exemplars preordained to manifest the protological and eschatological states through their ontological	conditions,	thus	serving	as	“personifications”	of	these	aeons.	Both	heroes	are also united by the quality of their luminosity that serves as an important sign of the beginning and end of time. Here, as in the Lurianic Kabbalah, the primordial	divine	light,	dispersed	during	Adoil’s	disintegration	and	then	the	Fall	of	the	Protoplast,	must	be	restored	by	the	efforts	of	the	righteous	who	will	become a new eschatological vessel of the uncreated light.

Enoch as the Vessel of light

2 Enoch	66.11	describes	the	condition	of	the	righteous	in	the	final	aeon,	depicting	them	as	luminous	beings:	“How	happy	are	the	righteous	who	will	escape	the	Lord’s	great	judgment,	for	their	faces	will	shine	forth	like	the	sun.”80 This tradition about righteous humans emitting light seems to be tied implicitly in the text to the story of its revealer, the seventh antediluvian patriarch, who himself underwent several chapters earlier a dramatic luminous transformation.

The	passage	may	thus	suggest	that	Enoch	–	depicted	in	chapter	22	as	undergoing a luminous metamorphosis before the Face of God81 which turns him into	a	shining	celestial	creature	–	becomes	the	very	first	fruit	of	this	future	aeon where all righteous persons will eventually regain the condition of luminosity. The eschatological luminosity here points to the protological condition of Adoil and, more importantly, to the incorruptible luminous state of the Protoplast,	a	condition	humanity	lost	after	Adam’s	fall.82

Here	the	righteous	of	the	world	are	envisioned	as	the	“gatherers”	of	divine	light, namely, those who repair both cosmogonic and anthropogonic vessels of the primordial light by turning themselves into the luminous vessel of the last days.83	One	might	see	in	this	mysterious	aeonic	gathering	of	the	transformed humans the eschatological refashioning of the luminous corporeality of the Heavenly Man,84	who	is	restored	by	the	efforts	of	righteous	souls	now	able to reconstitute the particles of divine light into a single aeon.85

The demiurgic role of Enoch

Although	the	Slavonic	apocalypse	insists	on	Deity’s	role	as	the	sovereign86 Creator of the universe, scholars have previously87 noted that this emphasis on the sovereignty of the Deity in creation does not seem entirely monolithic in the Slavonic text if	one	considers	the	Deity’s	decision	to	share	the	secrets	of	creation88 that He did not explain even to the angels.

Here, therefore, one might discern a delegation of the demiurgic function to God’s	vice-regent,	a	motif	that	will	play	an	important	role	in	the	Metatron	traditions in Sefer Hekhalot and the Zohar. In these texts, the letters on the crown given to Metatron attest to his partaking in the works of creation. Some scholars	have	noted	that	the	link	between	Metatron	and	the	“secrets	of	creation”	manifested in the Hekhalot tradition may witness to his role as a demiurge, or at least to his participation in the work of creation.89 Jarl Fossum draws attention to the tradition attested in Genesis Rabbah 5:4	on	Genesis	1:9,	according	to	which	“the	voice	of	the	Lord	became	a	guide	(מטטרון)90 to the waters, as it is written:	‘The	voice	of	the	Lord	is	over	the	waters.’”91 Fossum proposes that this passage	might	refer	to	the	Metatron’s	demiurgic	role.92 He also suggests that while the depiction of Metatron in Sefer Hekhalot is not demiurgic, it points to the matrix of ideas out of which the Gnostic concept of the demiurge possibly arose.93	The	beginning	of	the	tendency	towards	Enoch-Metatron’s	demiurgic	profile	might	already	be	detected	in	2 Enoch, a text which puts great emphasis	on	Enoch’s	knowledge	of	the	secrets	of	creation	and	which	sometimes	describes Enoch as if he were a divine being.94

In	this	respect,	Enoch’s	demiurgic	function	–	which	is	hinted	at	by	his	access	to	the	esoteric	knowledge	of	the	final	aeon	and	his	revelation	of	this	knowledge	to	the	people	of	the	earth	–	might	be	set	in	parallel	to	the	demiurgic function of Adoil, who is depicted as the revealer of the primordial aeon.

3. FINAl REMARkS

In later Metatron lore, Enoch-Metatron is portrayed as the perfector of human souls who, like Abatur in the Mandaean tradition, is responsible for the progress of human souls95	to	their	final	destiny.96 Both the Babylonian Talmud97 and Hekhalot literature98	hint	at	this	mysterious	office	of	Metatron	when	they	depict him as the teacher of Torah to the souls of deceased children.99

In	view	of	our	previous	investigation,	it	appears	that	this	later	Metatron’s	role	as	the	“captain”	of	souls100 might already be hinted at in 2 (Slavonic) Enoch via	the	translated	hero’s	enigmatic	participation	in	the	economy	of	the	eschatological	gathering	of	human	souls	in	the	final	aeon	of	the	righteous.101

This	promise	of	the	final	gathering	of	righteous	souls	into	a	single	luminous entity gives us hope that the aeonic vessels of primordial light, shattered in the beginning, will be eventually restored at the end of time

