Revelation given to Matthew Philip Gill via the Urim & Thummim. Present were Matthew Philip Gill, Philip Andrew Gill & David Relfe Smith. CHAPTER ONE The People of Light My name is Jeraneck son of Isnah from the house of Isnah. I have been taught the gospel of the Christ and the almighty God by my Father and Mother. But it is from my Mother that I have learnt a greater understanding of humility, respect and love and it is to her that I give thanks for the man I am today. I am the last and living Prophet of the People of Light and it is at a great and terrible time that I compile this sacred record, for even as I speak now war and famine do cover the whole land and the remaining followers of the Christ and the Almighty God have fled with me, the last living Prophet, to the temple of the Almighty God on the plains of Shainnon and it is here that my people intend to make their last stand against the invaders from the east. For it is my people that have strayed from the paths of righteousness and it is because of this that I do compile this record so that one day people may learn from the mistakes we have made, for the Lord has shown unto me his Prophet in the days before his coming, that these sacred records will one day come forth. For I have seen your day and I do tremble with great fear for the times in which I have seen you live. The Lord the Almighty God - 1 - has promised me, his servant, that if you remain faithful and steadfast that the sacred history of my people the People of Light will be placed in your hands and our history will be known once again to all the children of God. I lay down upon these twenty four plates the history of my people for I say unto you they were once a mighty and great people, willing to listen to the voice of their prophets and the voice of their God. To understand my people we must go back to their origins and the place from whence they sprang. And now I record the history of my people It is a time of great wickedness upon the whole earth but the People of Light do follow in the footsteps of the Prophet Araneck and do heed his words. They do keep the commandments of the Almighty God and they do worship him with one heart and one spirit but the land remains a wicked land and the people on the plains of Shinar have taken upon themselves and upon their whole land to build a mighty tower unto the Lord, for it is their wish to walk into the kingdom of the almighty God without humbling themselves. The Prophet Araneck being a mighty man in stature went before the Lord and offered up a sacred prayer saying. “Almighty God, Lord of Heaven and of the Earth spare the people, forgive them of their wickedness pour out the spirit upon their hearts, that they might have a great and mighty change of heart, that they may kneel before thee in solemn repentance for the wickedness they have done.” As Araneck finished his prayer unto the Lord - 2 - a great fire appeared before him in which stood the Lord of hosts the very Saviour. The Saviour and Lord of hosts did speak to the Prophet Araneck and Araneck did tremble before the Lord, for the Lord would not stay his hand. After Araneck had made his proposition to the Lord for the people, his heart grew sad and heavy for he knew if the people would not humble themselves and repent of their wickedness that the Lord would destroy them from off the whole earth. So with a heavy heart Araneck went unto his people and told them of the things that the Lord had spoken to him. Now the people of Araneck or in other words the People of Light listened with great attention to the words that Araneck spoke to them. And there stood in the midst of the great people one who was a guard of all the armies. And his name was Shiblon and he did listen with great listening and his heart was moved and he spoke to the people and he said this, “I will go down with the great Prophet Araneck and I will teach with him repentance and humility to the great tower builders, with one hand on my sword and my one hand on the shoulder of the Prophet we will go forth with great authority and power and I will see for myself whether or not the Lord will stay his hand.” Upon the next morning the prophet Araneck and the Captain of the army Shiblon did make the long walk to the plains of Shinar and they were walking for eight days and they came upon a hill that over looked the valley and plains of Shinar and they saw a great and mighty tower reaching above the clouds and into the sky and it did fill their hearts with great fear for they feared for the people. Upon seeing the tower Araneck spoke, - 3 - “You wicked, wicked people you cannot buy or walk your way into Heaven you must humble yourselves now, before the God of Heaven and of Earth does destroy you.” Upon hearing this, the people of the plains and valley of Shinar began to shout and ridicule and throw rocks and dirt and all manner of things toward the Prophet and Shiblon, these are the words that the people said, “We do not need a Prophet for our king has promised that in the coming days we will walk with God in the Heavens, we do not need to humble ourselves before God for we have all the things we need to enter into his Kingdom, for instance the mighty tower and our fine clothing and our mighty storehouse and our money.” After the people had finished shouting and screaming these words, the Prophet Araneck and his companion Shiblon made their way into the heart of the great city and to the base of the tower in the great city named after the great hunter and mighty king Nimrod. Upon seeing the great tower in the mighty and wicked city, Araneck knew in his heart why the Lord would not stay his hand, the people were wicked and liked being wicked and they would not change their hearts. Shiblon then spoke to the Prophet Araneck saying “let us go down to our friends who are camped by the river on the west and let us speak to Mahonri and let us see if he has spoken to the Lord about this same thing, the wickedness of the people of Shinar at the city of Nimrod” With this Araneck and Shiblon took their walk to the camp of Mahonri. Upon seeing Mahonri they did embrace him for he too was a Prophet of the Most High God, and he did lead them to his camp by the side of the river which was called Moack. Upon entering the tent of Mahonri he asked them - 4 - to sit and they relayed the tale of the people of Nimrod, and Mahonri said to Araneck, “I too have been to the city of Nimrod and I too have seen the wickedness there, and my heart sank also for the wickedness was great and the people would not listen to me.” Upon hearing these words Araneck asked Mahonri to go with him and Shiblon to the city of Nimrod to once again call the people to repentance. Upon the next day Araneck, Shiblon, Mahonri and his brother Jared did take their journey to the city of Nimrod. Upon entering the city there began a great storm and the whole earth shook beneath their feet and Araneck looked and saw that the great tower did sway to and throw, side to side and began to fall. Shiblon being a mighty man took hold of Araneck and forced him into a great hole and did shield him from the destruction. Araneck upon this prayed to the lord asking for protection from the destruction around them. “Oh Lord hear my words. Hear the words of thy Prophet, protect the lives of my people and my friends people, this I pray thee, Lord protect us.” Upon the ending of the prayer Shiblon looked out around him but could not see for the air was full with blackness and decay. Upon this Shiblon heard voices calling and crying but he could not make out their tongue. The Lord then moved upon Araneck and Araneck knew through the Holy Spirit that the language of the people of Nimrod had been cursed. He knelt down with Shiblon and offered a great prayer to the Lord of hosts. “Oh Lord thou art great and wonderful and although your anger is great I ask that you may preserve the language of the People of Light and also the language of our friends for this is the language of our first parents and we do not wish to lose that and all its meaning. We - 5 - pray this, oh Lord, with the power of all the Priesthood. Amen”. Araneck, having made his prayer to God, knew through the power of the holy priesthood that the Lord had spared his people, and spared the people of his friend Mahonri. And he knew that the Lord had spared the integrity of their language and now Araneck and Shiblon were moved by the Holy Spirit to leave the plains of Shinar and take their journey home to the People of Light. As they journeyed home their hearts became heavy and sad for they new the people at the great tower had not humbled themselves and Araneck became worried for his own people for he knew that not all of his people were righteous and he worried that the Lord, although he had spared his people and their language, would destroy them if they would not humble themselves to the words he would speak to them. - 6 - CHAPTER TWO The Great Journey As Araneck and Shiblon returned home, after many days of walking, they found their people in a state of preparedness, for they had already gathered themselves together with all manner of things, Sheep, Oxen, Camels, Donkeys, Horses and many other things they were prepared with, for the sight of this was like a mighty host and Araneck could not believe what stood before him, and his heart did soar for he knew his people had gathered together because the Lord had commanded it, and Shiblon stood forward and commanded that the people should make known their intentions and Azanar stood forward and told Araneck that he and all the people gathered had been commanded to do so by a bright and marvellous cloud of light, with this Araneck heard the voice of the Lord and the voice did say to him, “Your people are gathered for I have commanded them that they should be prepared, for they will leave this place and take their journey northward away from the wicked and destructive people of Shinar.” Upon hearing these words Araneck commanded Shiblon to move the people northward. The people of Araneck or in other words the People of Light were walking for the space of many days when the Lord appeared unto them in a cloud of fire. When Araneck saw the cloud he approached it and stretched fourth his hand so that he could touch the cloud, as he did he saw a hand appear from the cloud and in the hand there appeared to be a round solid brass ball, upon the ball Araneck saw that - 7 - there were written many things that would help his people to cross the desert waste and the mountain heights. Araneck went to remove the ball but was forbidden to do so, upon this the ball opened and inside the ball there was another solid brass ball with writing upon it. As Araneck looked at the writing he saw that the writing described stars in the heavens and seas on the ocean and the names by which the seas and oceans should be called and where to find them. As Araneck looked at the ball he heard a voice from the cloud which made him tremble, for he had never heard the Lord of the most high speak with such power and authority, these are the words which Araneck heard. “Because of the faithfulness of thy people, I the Lord God will give to you, Araneck my Prophet, this gift. Upon this gift are written commandments and instructions that the people should follow. If your people will follow the instructions upon the ball, I the Lord and Saviour of this world will lead you and your people to a safe and beautiful land and upon this land you and your people will find many wonderful and marvellous things, it is a land that I the Lord have chosen for thy people to inherit. Beware Araneck I will not be mocked, as soon as thy people forget the ways of the Prophets and of me I will cause them to be destroyed for all time. A commandment I give to you to mark your way to this land so that others I may command will be able to follow and find this pleasant and blessed land. I will now show unto you, Araneck, the form that these signs must take, they are this” the Lord then showed unto Araneck that mighty stone circles and monuments must be placed in all the lands they travel through. When Araneck saw the great stone monuments that must be built he marvelled at how his people would - 8 - accomplish the things that the lord had asked of them and by what means they were to be built. The Lord said this to Araneck, “I the Lord will provide all that is necessary for these markers to be built for many more people will follow these markers and they will stand as a testament to your journey and a sign that I the Lord am great and I will bless all that do follow my commandments.” After hearing the words of the Lord Araneck told his people all the things the Lord had told him, and they did sing out with one voice, “Hosanna, Hosanna, Hosanna to the most High God” Many years passed and the People of Light did take their journey north. Now their hearts were full of the love of God and although their journey was a hard and testing journey they remembered the promises which the Lord had given them, that if they were to build the stone markers that the Lord would guide their journey. The People of Light journeyed with a full heart and spirit. Many years past and their hearts were full at first but as the years past they began to be sorrowful, for their lives were hard and the wilderness began to take its toll on their spirits and they began to murmur and complain and began to neglect the building of the stone markers that the Lord had commanded them to build and they took it upon themselves that which their hearts desired and Araneck being very old went unto the people and began to call them to repentance saying, “Oh my people how quickly you have forgotten the words of your Lord and Saviour, for he promised us that if we were faithful and obedient he would guide our journey and make it light, that your burden may be carried by him but you have forgotten and now my people you wonder at your hardship. Repent, - 9 - repent, repent and kneel before your God if not you will be destroyed.” - 10 - CHAPTER THREE A New Prophet Is Chosen Now the People of Light in part did listen to the Prophet Araneck but there stood amongst them one who did not heed his words and his name was Lioneck and he was the very son of the Prophet Araneck, for Lioneck was the firstborn of Araneck and he had journeyed with the people since he was a small child. Now Lioneck stood before the People of Light and said to them, “Do not follow this foolish old man for he thinks he speaks with God but I tell you now that God does not speak with him and if he did speak with my father he would command us to stay here for this land has all that we need and want. Do not listen to this fool”. After making his words known to the people, Araneck wept for his son. Lioneck, being his firstborn was to be taught all the things that his father Araneck was taught in the ways of the spirit, now Araneck grew to be very old and his son Lioneck gave him no peace and Araneck cried unto the Lord saying, “Oh Lord of Heaven how long will you permit me to live upon this earth and how long, oh Lord, must I bear my firstborn and his raging against me.” and the Lord appeared before Araneck as if it were a cloud of burning fire and a voice sounded from the cloud saying, “Oh my Prophet, repent of your thoughts and your feelings, for I the Lord, will deal justly and swiftly with all those who defile my Prophets and my name. Take strength my servant, for soon you will have your rest.” Upon hearing these words Araneck found strength in his legs and walked amongst the people and told them to - 11 - gather to his tent, for he was soon to find his rest. And so it was that the People of Light gathered to the tent of the Prophet and waited to hear the words of Araneck for the last time. Araneck being very old and frail stood before the people and the people beheld that the spirit of the Lord fell upon him and the people beheld that the spirit of the Lord shone like the sun at midday, for it filled his tent and all that were present felt of the spirit and of the Lord and many did fall to the ground because they were so overcome that they could not stand. Now the five children of Araneck did stand before him in order that the oldest was first and the youngest was last. Now I Jeraneck make no apology for what follows, for Araneck did not write down upon his record all of the names of his children, but I Jeraneck have the first three names, Lioneck being the oldest, Sharaneck being the second in line and Hadjaneck being the third in line. Now they sat before Araneck and waited for their father to name his successor to the prophetic calling, now Lioneck, being the oldest, stood and held his father so much so that Araneck had to fight for breath, upon seeing this Hadjaneck caught hold of Lioneck and wrestled him to the floor. Now Araneck cried with a loud voice as if being touched by the Mighty One of Heaven and he cried out, “Oh my sons, be faithful and obedient to the will of the Lord, for the Lord has chosen his next Prophet and Sharanack shall be the anointed one and Hadjaneck shall be his voice unto the people, for although Sharaneck has no tongue his spirit is mighty, the mightiest off all Gods people, with this mighty spirit Sharaneck will tell Hadjaneck the will of the Lord.” Now Lioneck grew angry and he threw off Hadjaneck and he went before the people and stood before them and said to them, “Do not listen to the ravings of an old man but listen - 12 - to me and I will lead you and we will go north to the lands that my scouts have told me of and we will have plenty and we will have no need to brake our backs on the building of these worthless stone monuments.” Now his words pleased many and Lioneck did draw away many of the sons and daughters of light. Now upon hearing his son Lioneck, the prophet Araneck fell to the floor and died. And while his father lay dead upon the floor and his brothers wept over his body Lioneck left the tent of his father and took with him two thousand of the sons and daughters of light. And Lioneck took with him five hundred horses from the great herd of the People of Light and he took three hundred goats and two hundred sheep and many other things did Lioneck steal from the children of light. Now I suppose that Lioneck took his people north and the people that he took are the forefathers of the people who do now send their seed to destroy their brothers and sisters upon this island. Now Sharaneck being called as the new prophet of the People of Light wept for his father for the space of five days and after this he did offer sacrifice on behalf of his brothers people so that the Lord would preserve his brothers people. Now many years passed since Lioneck and his people departed and Sharaneck and Hadjaneck took the remaining People of Light west in to many strange and mysterious lands and their children began to be old so that their children grew in to young men of great stature and their girls in to fair and delightsome young women. Now a problem occurred that when Lioneck drew away his people, there began to be more men than women so that not every woman had a husband, now this was because the priesthood was not given to unworthy males - 13 - and only worthy males could marry worthy females. Now the females of the children of light went unto the Prophet Sharaneck and his mouth piece Hadjaneck and complained for they wished that all could marry and experience the joy of marriage and Sharaneck through the power of the spirit told Hadjaneck that the Lord would only permit marriage between a righteous man and a righteous woman. Now the females that had gathered to complain were overcome with the spirit and they said to Sharaneck, “Our children and our children’s children covenant with the Lord that they will remain faithful and righteous so that all our children can one day share in the love and companionship of marriage.” - 14 - CHAPTER FOUR A Mighty Vision The People of Light journeyed westward and Sharaneck and Hadjaneck had many children, even 30 between them and Sharaneck and Hadjaneck in the one hundred and fiftieth year gathered the people together by the shores of the sea and told them that the Lord had commanded them to gather together one thousand logs from the trees of the forest that was round about them. So the People of Light did according to the will of the Lord. And many days passed and the People of Light stood before the Prophet Sharaneck and his mouth piece Hadjaneck and demanded to know why their children had done such a hard labour. And as they were murmuring and crying a man by the name of Necka stood before the people and said “Let us take these logs and throw them into the sea and then let our anger be kindled towards Sharaneck and Hadjaneck, for they have worked us without explanation” as Necka was speaking to the people a voice from heaven sounded as if it were a great thunder and the voice said, “Behold my people, listen to the words of my Prophet, for he is ordained by me, the Lord Almighty. And his words are my words and when my Prophet speaks it is as if I have spoken and if he commands that one thousand logs be cut, it is as if I have commanded it. Now because of your wickedness you will cut two thousand logs and bring them before Sharaneck and his mouthpiece Hadjaneck and then I will forgive this out cry”. - 15 - Now when the Lord had spoken the words, the people fell to their knees and cried unto Heaven for forgiveness. And so it was that when the people cried unto Heaven a voice came again to the people and it was the voice of the Lord and he said, “Why are you kneeling and asking for forgiveness? Have I not already commanded you to go about your business and then I will forgive you”. After the People of Light had heard the voice from above, even the voice of the Saviour they did go to work collecting the logs that had been commanded them to collect. Now the people did work hard and even their children did labour hard and on the tenth day of their labour they brought the logs before the Prophet Sharaneck and the people did give praise to the most High God. When the people had finished their praising and their singing the Prophet Sharaneck stood before the people and he looked upon their labour and he did give thanks in his heart unto the people. Now Sharaneck and Hadjaneck went before the Lord in private prayer and they did ask with one voice what the people should do with their labour. And so it was that as Sharaneck and Hadjaneck were in prayer the Lord sent unto them an Angel and he did hold in one hand a sphere or ball and in the other hand was a mitre and upon the mitre was written, “I the Lord am great follow in my footsteps and I will lead you to the land I have promised you.” Now when Hadjaneck saw the mitre he held out his hand as if to take hold of the mitre but the Lord forbade him and the Angel spoke to Hadjaneck saying, “Your brother Sharaneck is the Lords anointed and it is he that this is to be given, for you are his mouthpiece and he is your Prophet.” Now the Angel called Sharaneck fourth and placed in his one hand the mitre and in his other hand - 16 - the Angel placed the sphere or ball. When Sharaneck took hold of the objects he was filled with the spirit and he knew straight away what their purposes were for. Sharanack was mighty in spirit and the gift of revelation came upon him as easily as a Razaner comes upon the grass. Now the Angel moved forward to stand beside Sharaneck and he began to instruct Sharaneck and Hadjaneck so that they would know how to use the mitre and the sphere. The Angel opened a vision for Sharaneck and Hadjaneck and in the vision they saw many ships upon the water and the Angel told Sharaneck that the ships would carry the People of Light to the land that the Lord had promised them. Now the Angel instructed Hadjaneck in the ways of the building of the ships and he commanded Hadjaneck that the ships must be the length of one thousand mitre sticks and this must be done according to the Word of God and there must be no more or less and the Angel commanded Hadjaneck that the depth of the ships must be 50 mitre sticks and no more or less. The Angel then showed Sharaneck how the ball or sphere must be used. The Angel told Sharaneck that the outer ball was to guide the ships during the light and the inner ball was to guide them during the darkness. Now the Angel continued to tell Sharaneck and Hadjaneck many great things but I have been commanded not to write them here but to write them on the plates that deal with our religion. When Sharaneck and Hadjaneck had been instructed by the Angel they fell to the earth and they lay there for the space of three days and the people became troubled and they supposed that Sharaneck and Hadjaneck were dead and there began to be a great turmoil amongst - 17 - the people and some believed that God had abandoned them. And there stood one man whose name was that of Shiblon and he was chief guard, for he was the son of Shiblon and he stood before the people and cried unto them and told them to repent of their wicked ways, for he knew that the Lord would not abandon his people. And Shiblon (the second) went to the tent of the Prophet and his mouthpiece and when he had entered the tent he saw a great light as if it were fire surrounding Sharaneck and Hadjaneck, but Shiblon (the second) being a tall and mighty man was not afraid and he took hold of the Prophet and as he did so was filled with the spirit of God and he saw before his eyes an Angel and the Angel spoke to Shiblon saying, “My name is Jonathon and I have been sent unto the Prophet to guide him and to teach him and you, my brother, must protect him and his mouthpiece, for this is the will of the Almighty” when the Angel had spoken these words the light went out and vanished along with the Angel. And when the light had gone Sharaneck and Hadjaneck awoke, sat up, and embraced each other, for they had seen the hills and the mountains of the land and they had seen the valleys and the lakes and the animals and they had seen their children’s future and their children’s, children’s future. Now when Hadjaneck stood Sharaneck also stood and Sharaneck went out of his tent and went before the people and the people did rejoice, for their Prophet was alive and Hadjaneck spoke to the people and said, “The Lord has shown us and told us the things that we must do to cross this great water. Out of the logs that we have gathered we must build ships so that we can sail across the water to the land that the Lord has promised us and there we will build a great and mighty nation.” CHAPTER FIVE - 18 - Hadjaneck’s Mission Fulfilled Now when Hadjaneck had finished speaking unto the people he set them the charge to build the ships, and all this was done through the Prophets mouthpiece Hadjaneck. Now many years passed and the ships had been completed and the people were ready to enter the ships and sail across the sea to the land the Lord had promised them. Now the people had grown strong in spirit and there was no murmuring or complaining or fighting’s or any manor of wickedness, for the space of five years and the people were one with God. Now the time came for the people to enter into the ships but before they did, Sharaneck and Hadjaneck called all of the people together on the seashore. Sharaneck and Hadjaneck knew the Lord and they had received revelation from the Lord and they were commanded to tell all of the people the revelation that they had received at this time. Hadjaneck grew ill with a mighty sickness and the sickness took away the use of his legs and the use of his arms. And so it was that it became very difficult for Hadjaneck to serve his brother and Prophet, and because of this Sharaneck had not spoken to the people for two years. Now he gave a mighty spirit to comfort Hadjaneck, even the very same spirit that sits to the left of the Father, and this spirit manifest itself unto Hadjaneck and this spirit was the Holy Spirit, and he gave strength to - 19 - Hadjaneck and bore him up so that he might tell the people of the revelation that he had received. Now Hadjaneck spoke to the people saying, “The time has come to take our great journey. The ships are built and the stores are full, and the Lord has indeed blessed our people, for it is only his will that has led us here and helped us build those ships. Now my brothers and sisters, the Lord wishes you to know the revelation he has given to the Prophet Sharaneck, but I say this, it is only through his power and the faith of my heart that I am able to stand here today, for I will soon meet the Saviour, and he will welcome me into the kingdom for ever and ever. The Lord has promised through revelation that if we, his people are faithful and obedient that we shall become one with him. Now because I am dying Sharaneck went to the Lord in prayer and asked if he might be able to be made whole so that he might speak unto you by his own mouth. And the Lord has indeed blessed the Prophet Sharaneck and when he awoke from his sleep this very morning his tongue was made whole and he could speak and I know that it is only through his faithfulness and obedience that this was given to him.” Now when Hadjaneck had finished speaking to the people his heart grew heavy and sad for he knew that this would be the last time that he would speak unto his people, and Sharaneck was touched by the spirit and he knew the thoughts of Hadjaneck’s heart and mind and Sharaneck spoke to his people for the first time and his voice was like that of his Fathers and the people were amazed and they stood as if their tongues were bound. And Hadjaneck said to the people, “Listen to my brother,” and Sharaneck told the people with the power of the Lord is his own voice, “I have prayed unto the lord and - 20 - he has delivered me from my bondage and he has loosed my tongue so that I may testify of his greatness and because I prayed with a sincere heart having faith, the Lord not only loosed my tongue but he also has blessed me with the desires of my heart,” And so it was that as Sharaneck was about to tell the people what Lord had blessed him with, the Heavens opened. And out of the Heavens there came a man unlike any man they had seen before. And he stood in the midst of them and said, “I am he who will bleed for you at my first coming. I am he who will be born to a virgin pure and clean. I am he who is the only begotten of the Father. I am he whom your Prophets testify of. I am the Saviour, the very Christ. My servant Sharaneck, I bless you with the desires of your heart, for I know those desires and I bless you that you will never taste death, but more than this you shall come to me two times in the flesh, once at my birth where you shall bring gold to my cradle and second when you shall meet me at the Mount of Olives when I shall come the second and final time. And unto you Hadjaneck, I say this, that on the morrow you shall be with me in my kingdom but I give unto your seed, Hadjaneck, a blessing that it will be through them that the record of your people will be given to my servant in the days before my second coming.” Now I Jeraneck do testify that I am a descendent of Hadjaneck and my son Rayanack has also been promised through revelation that he will not taste death until he has given this record of our people to the servant of the Lord in the days before his second coming. - 21 - CHAPTER SIX Journey to the Sacred Island Now the Lord said unto the people that they must obey the words of the Prophet Sharaneck and that soon they would reach the land that he, the Lord, had promised them. Now when the Lord had finished speaking to the people he ascended in to the heavens and the heavens shone and sang at his ascending and as the people looked up, the heavens closed and they remained closed and the light that the Saviour had brought with him was gone and the people stood in amazement and looked around about themselves and they sang praises unto the Lord and they shouted hosannas into the heavens for the space of four days And so it was that the time came that the people should enter into the ships and they were many in number even Twenty two thousand. And the Prophet Sharaneck, stood by the seashore and beckoned all to enter the ships and they came down to the seashore, and they came with their cattle and their livestock and their children and all manner of things they did bring from the land that they were leaving and so great was the multitude, that it took five days for them to enter in to the ships. Now when they had entered in to the ships and the doors were sealed, the Prophet Sharaneck looked out upon the land and he knew that the land had been good to them and he blessed the land for future inhabitants of the land and he said, “Oh Lord, my God, hear the words of my mouth for I am thy servant. I cry unto you as your servant and as thy servant - 22 - and thy prophet I bless this land in thy name, for we have been faithful and we have erected many stone monuments unto thee, just as you have commanded us to do and we have done this not for our own edification but for yours oh Lord, and we have done this so that those that follow after us will know that we were the People of Light and that we followed thy teachings and thy principles and I ask, oh Lord and Saviour, that you will guide us on our journey, that you will guide us across the seas to our new land, that you have promised us. I ask that you guide us and set the wind to move our sails and calm the waves of the mighty sea. I ask this, oh Lord, with my mouth and pray unto you, that you may deliver these blessings unto my people and a blessing I give unto the seed of Hadjaneck that they may stay strong and faithful and the blessing that you have promised them will be able to be poured out upon them. Oh Lord, bless this land and all that dwell on her, for it has been a good land and it has kept thy people. In the name of the Almighty Lord. Amen.” Now when Sharaneck had made an end to his prayer he entered in to a ship and the ships set sail upon the sea and they were on the sea for 10 days and the seas were calm and the winds were good and the ships sailed well and all the people that were in the ships were blessed and the Lord guided their journey. On the tenth day, the seas became still and the winds died and Sharaneck was moved by the spirit to go onto the top of the ship and he cried unto the Lord saying, “Oh Lord, why have you abandoned your people, oh Lord guide your people, see them safely to the land that you have promised,” and a voice from heaven said to Sharaneck, “Sharaneck, my servant. Have you forgotten that I am the Lord your God? Have you forgotten that I promised you that I would guide - 23 - your people? Now remember that I am the Lord and I will guide you. The orb that I have given you look to it for guidance and follow its instruction,” the voice then left and Sharaneck left the top of the ship and went beneath and brought forth the orb and went back to the top of the ship and held it aloft in to the air and the orb began to spin and when Sharaneck bought the orb down from the air he saw that upon the ball was the direction his people must take. And so Sharaneck ordered Ajanid who was the fleet’s navigator to move the ships north-eastward and Ajanid did what had been asked of him, for he was a skilled navigator and righteous man. And the ships sailed north and easterly and on the night of the 12 day the ships came to rest on the sea shore of the land the Lord had promised and Sharaneck led his people from the ships on to the shore of the land and when all the ships were empty they knelt down and gave thanks to the Lord their God and Sharaneck cried unto the heavens thanking the Lord for preserving his people upon the seas and Sharaneck cried, “Oh Lord, oh Lord, oh Lord, my people have made it to the land that you have promised and they have been obedient unto thy commands and because of thy power, oh Lord, the waves were still and the winds were strong, oh Lord, oh Lord, oh Lord, continue to bless my people upon this land.” When Sharaneck had finished crying unto the Lord he gave orders for the people to give thanks and the people sang and danced and gave thanks unto the Lord for the space of two days and nights and when the people had made an end to their praising Sharaneck assembled his people and Sharaneck said to his people, “We have journeyed across the sea. The Lord made the waves calm and the winds to blow and he has brought us here and we have feasted and given thanks two days and nights and - 24 - now the Lord wishes that we go forth onto the land and he wishes that we build great cities and great monuments unto him so that we may be able to worship our Lord and Saviour.” Now when Sharaneck had finished making an end to his words, he summoned Shiblon (the second), to organise the people into groups, for Shiblon was the master of the guard and he was a mighty man like his father before him and Shiblon went out and organised the people into groups so that the people were gathered together in twelve groups, so that it would be easier to take the people up on to the land. And Sharaneck did lead his people forth from the seashore and onto the land and they stayed for many years upon the land building buildings and building temples and places of worship and praising and singing unto the Lord their God. Now I, Jeraneck, do bear testimony that the people did indeed stay faithful and they did all the things that the Lord commanded of them and now I return to the record. And when 60 years had passed since the people arrived on the land, Sharaneck was commanded of the Lord to go and teach to the entire world and to go west across the great sea, for he was promised that he would not taste death. Now before he left he anointed one to stand in his stead and when he had done this Sharaneck made his journey west and the people mourned for 3 days for their loss. And so it was that at a place called Rahmanah, he was given a monument in his honour for the service he had given the people and it was a mighty monument with a great stone and upon the stone was written, “Sharaneck, - 25 - whom the Lord gave back his tongue and did speak with the thundering and lightning’s of heaven. He was a true Prophet of God”. Now at this time, being 60 years upon the land, the people had grown strong and their numbers had increased and they had children and their children had children and their flocks had increased and their horse heard became a large one, their storehouses were full of grain and they were indeed blessed by the Lord, and they took pleasure in worshipping the Lord their God and because the people were happy in their worship, they sang and danced and gave thanks, and they built a great and mighty temple and they built the temple on the plains they called “Shainnon” and it is the very same temple in which I, Jeraneck, do sit and compile the record of my fathers. For it is the very temple that they did build in the name of the Lord and they were a mighty and grateful people and the plains of Shainnon were great and vast and it was filled with may buildings and houses and many places where the People of Light could gather to sing and dance and also to hear the words of the Lord. Now before his great journey Sharaneck had anointed another in his stead, a new Prophet. - 26 - CHAPTER SEVEN Three Righteous Brothers Are Chosen Zioneck was not just a Prophet he was a leader unto the people and his name was of two names and his first name was Zioneck but the people did not call him Zioneck but they instead chose to call him Amoneck, for Amoneck interpreted means mighty leader and ruler of men but for the sake of this record I, Jeraneck, will refer to him as Zioneck, for Zioneck was his first name given to him by his parents and by that of the Lord. Zioneck was a great man and a great Prophet and in the 65th year of the people being on the land he called for a great council and he called for all the elders and all of the high priests to gather and they all came and gathered in the upper chamber of the temple, the very chamber in which I now sit and compile this record, for it is a mighty chamber the only place left in the holy house of the Lord that I may be safe. And the chamber was a mighty chamber full of seats and paintings and of all the wonders and wonderful things of God. For the people were very blessed of God and the gathered elders and high priests of the People of Light were gathered and seated in the chamber and Zioneck sat in the high seat and beside Zioneck sat his two counsellors, Bribeneck and Shibineck, and they were his counsellors, who with Zioneck oversaw the running of the country and they sat before the gathered high priests and elders. In the centre of the room, on the floor, was the sign of the Urim and the Thummim and all who wished to speak before Zioneck and the country and the church, for - 27 - by this time the people had formed themselves into a church so that they might worship the Most High God. Now, anyone who wished to address Zioneck had first to stand in the centre of the Urim and the Thummim. Now all the elders and the high priests were gathered in the council chamber and there began to be great murmuring and chattering coming from among them as to why they were gathered. So it was that Zioneck stood and walked into the centre of the great seal and stood before the gathered high priest and elders and said, “Behold you have been called to this council chamber because I have summoned you and the Lord commanded it. For am I not his Prophet? Was I not anointed by Sharaneck? Am I not God’s mouthpiece? Have I not guided our people in righteousness these many years? I have news for this council that has come from the very throne of the Lord. We are not alone upon this land and this is the reason that the Lord has commanded this council to meet, so that we may discuss as men of God what we should do about this news.” Now sitting in the council were three young men and they were the descendants of Hadjaneck the same Hadjaneck that was the mouthpiece of Sharaneck and these three young, brave men were of mighty stature, they were great hunters for the people and they were well known by the people for their great skill with the bow and there faithfulness in the Lord. Now they were indeed the very descendants of Hadjaneck and they were moved by the spirit to go forth and find the people that Zioneck had spoken of and take to them the gospel of the Most High. The eldest of the three descendants of Hadjaneck stepped up and walked forward onto the seal of the Urim and the Thummim and he stood as if been encircled about by the - 28 - hosts of heaven and the willingness of his spirit shone forth for all to see. As he began to speak the room fell silent and the words that he spoke filled the room and the spirit of the Lord shut the mouths of the doubters, for this young man’s name was the very name of his ancestor. His name was Hadjaneck and all the days of his life he lived as the Lord wished, for his name was a constant reminder to him of the Lord and the great work that the Lord had given his forefathers to do. And he spoke saying, “My name is Hadjaneck. I am a descendent of the same Hadjaneck that spoke for the prophet Sharaneck and I have prayed unto the Lord these many days to be able to stand before this council and tell you of the things of my heart. For the Lord has revealed to me in a dream, that there are people north of this great city who were also brought to this land by the power of the Lord and myself and my brethren wish to go and seek them out and bring them down to our city and among our people, so that we may join together and become one people.” When Hadjaneck had finished speaking to the council, the council was silent. During this silence Zioneck stood froth and walked forward again on to the Urim and the Thummim and took hold of Hadjaneck and kissed him on both cheeks and declared him worthy of the Lord and he also declared Hadjaneck’s brethren worthy to go forth on their mission to find the people of the north and bring them to the People of Light so that they may be joined as one people on the face of the land. Now the council that was called went on for many hours and the discussions and pleadings unto the Lord were great and Zioneck oversaw all of these things, for he was a great man and a great leader. - 29 - CHAPTER EIGHT The Mission to the People of the North Now I, Jeraneck, being the last Prophet of my people, record on these plates the mission that was taken by Hadjaneck and his brothers, and his brothers were called Misamaneck and Shiznar and they were great men for they did do great works upon this land. I was taught by my mother about their mission to the people of the north and it is thanks to them in part that all the houses of the People of Light became one and our people became one. Now, I write upon this record the story of their mission and their dealings with the people of the north, for the Lord has commanded me to include this upon these plates, for it will bless the lives of his servants in the days before his second coming. I return now to the record and make an account of their mission. Now Hadjaneck went to his brothers and told them that they must go with him and they said to Hadjaneck that they would follow him and that they would do so with a willing spirit, for they to had been told by the Lord that they were to go on this mission. And so they walked into the north country for the space of fourteen days, for they had travelled north further than any other man of the People of Light had ever walked. On the fourteenth day they came to a river and the river was deep and wide, and it seemed to them that their journey was to go no further, for this was a mighty river, and so they prayed to the Lord that they might cross the river and the - 30 - Lord answered their prayers and they crossed the river and entered in to a land full of forest and all manner of creatures and wild beasts that they had never before seen and they journeyed in the forest for the space of five days. On the fifth day they came across a great building and this building was tall and it reached in to the heavens and upon its walls were markings or writing that they had never seen before and could not read. Hadjaneck and his brothers wondered at who had made this tower and who had written this language and they supposed that it must be the people of the north who had built the tower and they spent three days and nights camped about the tower and they prayed unto the lord and asked that they might understand the words that were written upon the tower. As Hadjaneck looked about the tower the spirit witnessed to him that the people of the north had built the tower and that the writing upon the tower was written in their language. Misamaneck, Hadjaneck’s brother, stood far from the tower looking into a valley that was full of trees and a mighty river, and in the valley he saw many buildings and smoke rising from the valley and Misamaneck told Shiznar to go down and make an account of the things that were in the valley but Hadjaneck stopped Shiznar and said to Misamaneck that they should wait by the great tower for he knew that the people of the north would come unto them, for this place was a holy place and he said that he knew these things because the Holy Spirit has told him. So it was that three days passed and they waited at the tower for the people of the north to come unto them and on the third day the people of the north came forward and made them selves known unto Hadjaneck and his brothers. Hadjaneck stood and went forth unto the people - 31 - of the north and he stretched forth his hand and greeted the people of the north and as he did this he said, “My name is Hadjaneck, I come from the People of Light, we are friends and brothers, we believe in the one true God and it is he that has sent us in to your land to make ourselves known unto you, that we might become one people being joined together in one place.” And Hadjaneck stopped talking unto them and stood for he had made an end of all that he had to say to them. And the people of the north stood and looked upon each other in astonishment for although they did not speak the same language the Holy Spirit made the words known unto them. Now the people of the north were tall men and they wore beards and they were light and fair, and they looked as if the sun had given them life. Now the leader of the group of people who were of the north, was called Judna, and he stood forth and approached Hadjaneck and held out his hand so that Hadjaneck might take hold of it and Hadjaneck took hold of Judna's hand and as Hadjaneck took hold of Judna’s hand the spirit testified to him that the people of the north were people of God and that they meant them no harm and the same was to be said for Judna, for it is written that when he took hold of Hadjaneck’s hand the spirit told him that he was a man of the Most High God. Judna spoke unto Hadjaneck and his brethren saying, “Come I will take you to our city and I will take you to our leader and our council and there you will be told of the history of our people and all the things that trouble your mind will be made clear.” When the three brothers heard this the spirit interpreted the words unto their understanding, and because of this they were glad and they went with Judna and the people of the north and - 32 - they were travelling for the space of five days and while they were travelling they beheld all manner of buildings both small and large and on the buildings were written strange writings and it was the same writing that was written upon the tower, and they saw many people and they were greeted with warmth and friendship as they travelled. Now, on the morning of the fifth day they came to a city and as they entered the city many people came out of their homes and greeted them and they sang, and their praises filled the air and they said with one voice, “Hallelujah, hallelujah the people have come to us, the people have come to us.” When Hadjaneck and his brothers heard this they were astonished for they had never met the people of the north until that time and it seemed to Hadjaneck and his brethren that they were expecting them and had been for a long time. Hadjaneck looked about and he beheld a great multitude of people and the people had gathered to see them and to greet them. Now Judna had seen this and he stood before the people and said unto them, “They have come unto us and now I, Judna, will take them before the council and then you may greet them and speak with them.” With this Judna led them away to a great building and they were taken to the council chamber of the leader of the people of the north and they stood before the council. Now, when they were stood before the assembled people, an old man came before Hadjaneck and took hold of him and his name was Venroan and he embraced Hadjaneck and he said to Hadjaneck, “Welcome my brothers. Although my words are hard for you to understand I pray that the Lord will make them easy for you to understand. We are the People of Ridnon and we - 33 - were bought to this land with the people of Limndon our cousins, many, many years ago and we were brought here by the power of the Most High and we have kept a record of our dealings with God and our religion and we have kept it sacred, for we were told in our past that three brothers would come unto us and bring us further light and knowledge and we were told by our leaders of old that we would be joined with this people, for among them there would be Prophets and men anointed of God to lead them and we were told that we should join with them and become one people and it is to this end we have kept a record of our religious practises and our religious orders. Now I say, that these three brothers have come and I embrace you as a brother, for you are my brothers, my brothers in the gospel of the Most High.” When Venroan had finished speaking, Hadjaneck also embraced him and they cried together for their hearts were full of the spirit of God and the whole council chamber sang out with one voice, “Glory to God, Glory to the Most High God.” - 34 - CHAPTER NINE A People United Under God Hadjaneck and his brothers stayed amongst the people of the north for the space of a year and in this time they learned the language of the people more fully, they rejoiced with the people and sang and danced with the people and they went about teaching the people and going from house to house and from building to building and they were teaching and learning. Now at this time Hadjaneck and his brothers were living in the house of Adnar, and his wife was called Lunar and Lunar was high priestess of the people and she and Adnar had 8 children and they were blessed of the Lord. Lunar, being a very learned woman came to Hadjaneck and asked Hadjaneck if his people had priestesses and Hadjaneck said that they did not, that it was not given for them to have them and that they had been taught that they were not to have them. When Lunar heard this she was afraid, for she had been taught in the temple of her people that she was anointed by God to do the things that she had done. And she went to the temple with Hadjaneck and she read from the sacred text of the people of the north and she read to him that the Lord had said that this was permitted. Now I Jeraneck have been commanded by the Lord not to write the further detail of this, for it is to be found in detail upon the record that deals with our religion, so I make no further remarks on this other than to say that Lunar was correct and Hadjaneck was not. - 35 - Now the children of the People of Ridnon and Limndon were taught by their mothers and they were taught that they were to be prayerful and to be contrite and be examples to the people around them, and it is from these people that we have learned the value of motherhood for before we joined ourselves with the People of Ridnon and Limndon we held motherhood in no great esteem. Now I, Jeraneck, return to the record. When one year had passed and they had learned and taught, Hadjaneck went before the council and he went to speak with Venroan but Venroan had been replaced for it was their custom to serve the people for a set time, and Venroan’s time had come and gone and he had been replaced by a man by the name of Roadnen. Now Roadnen greeted the three brother’s in the same manner as Venroan had done and he walked with Hadjaneck and his brothers and Roadnen said to them, “I am a descendent of Ridnon and my family are the keepers of the great library and it is my wish to show you this library before the council go with you to see your Prophet.” And Hadjaneck and his brothers walked with Roadnen and they came to a large hill and the hill was hollowed out so that they could walk in to it and they made their way in to the hill and down many steps until they had come to a great library and in the library were many records, some made of metal and others of wood and there were so many that Hadjaneck was struck with great amazement and he said unto Roadnen, “Are these the records spoken of by Venroan? Are these the records of your people?” And Roadnen answered and said, “This is the Great Library of Nimdoa, for it was he who made this building and in here are the records of the People of Ridnon and the People of - 36 - Limndon and they contain a fuller part of our history and from whence we came from.” I, Jeraneck, the compiler of this record and the last Prophet of the People of Light have never seen this library but I know of its existence through the teachings of my mother and of the sacred writings that I have read and I tell you this because not even I have seen its beauty. But I say this, unto the servant of the Lord in the days before his second coming, that this record that I have compiled, is small compared to that of the People of Ridnon and Limndon, for they have many records, but I have not been blessed to see them with my eyes but the Lord has made it known unto me that the servants of the Lord in the days before his second coming, will be given revelation concerning those records. And I say that the Lord will choose the time to revel them unto you. But I say unto you that even if I had them I would not be able to abridge them, for I would not have material enough to do so and I do not have the authority to give these records to you even if I had them, but I testify that their records will come unto the world through you, the Lords servant, in the last days. My calling is to write the history of my people and to make sure that it is kept safe from the people that do come unto our land in anger. I now return to the records and the mission of the three faithful brothers, Hadjaneck, Misamaneck and Shiznar. Now when Hadjaneck and his brothers had looked around the great library they knew that it would take many years to read all that was contained with its walls but Hadjaneck went to take a record and as he was about to do this the spirit moved Misamaneck to stop him from taking the record and when Misamaneck took hold of Hadjaneck, - 37 - Hadjaneck was shocked and Shiznar said unto them, that these records were not for them but for the servant of the Lord in the last days of the world. Now Roadnen knew these things for they were written in the records that deal with the religion of the people, but he wanted to show Hadjaneck and his brothers that they were a people not without records and history, and that they were a people that lived within the law of the Most High, and when Hadjaneck had heard these things he turned to his brothers and said, “Our mission here is done, we will now return to our people and commence the work of uniting our people together.” When Hadjaneck had finished talking, Roadnen led them to the council chamber and informed all that had gathered that they were to go with Hadjaneck and his brothers unto the People of Light and stand before the holy Prophet. On the next morning they, Roadnen, his counsellors, and Hadjaneck and his brethren went forth and they rode back to their people on the horses that the People of Ridnon and Limndon kept and they rode unto the City of Light. While on their journey to the lands of the south and the city of the People of Light, Misamaneck prayed unto the Lord that the people might be glad to be joined with the People of Ridnon and Limndon and he cried unto the Lord and the Lord spoke unto him from heaven saying, “The work that you have done and your brothers have done is great in my sight and it has pleased me greatly. It has been the greatest work that has been done on the face of the earth. For you have brought together my people and my people are now one, but behold a time will come when a great calamity will befall your people because of their pride and it is your responsibility along with your brothers to preach unto the - 38 - people against pride, for it is of the evil one and not of me. Now go my faithful servant, you have served me well.” Now many days had passed and Hadjaneck and his brothers and Roadnen and his counsellors came unto the City of Light and they went straight unto the council chamber of the Prophet Zioneck. And they stood before Zioneck, and Hadjaneck stood before the council of Zioneck upon the Urim and the Thummim and gave an account of his time among the People of Ridnon and Limndon. And he did tell them of the great record chamber and he did tell the council about the new religious teachings that he had learned from the People of Ridnon and Limndon, and he bear testimony of their love for the People of Light. Then Roadnen stood forth and he spoke to the council saying, “My name is Roadnen, I am the leader of the People of Ridnon and the People of Limndon and I come to this council chamber to officially ask that our people and your people may become untied as one people, as one nation. I ask this for it is written in our holy text, that one day our peoples will stand together as one nation under God. I humbly submit myself to this council and to you, the Prophet of the people.” With this Roadnen stopped speaking and fell to his knees. Upon seeing this Zioneck ran over to him and held him up and he took hold of Roadnen and he embraced him and said to him, “It is Gods will that you are here and it is Gods will that we be united as one people and who am I to stand in the way of the will of God, I am his servant and his anointed Prophet and I do his will. In the name of the people and the name of our Lord, I hereby unite our people into one nation under the direction of the Most High God.” When Zioneck had finished speaking the whole council chamber - 39 - erupted with cheering and hallelujahs and from this time on the people were one. - 40 - CHAPTER TEN The First Great War Now many years had passed since the People of Ridnon and Limndon had joined themselves with the People of Light and the people lived in harmony for many years and the Lord blessed them so that their flocks grew and their cities grew. The people became mighty upon the whole land and they built many wonderful buildings and they went to and fro on the land, from the lands of Ridnon and Limndon to the lands of Light and they conversed one with another and many were married and joined together and they had many children and waxed strong upon the land. They became a mighty nation and they filled many parts of the land, and great forests were cut down to make way for great places of worship and great highways were built up so that they might be able to go to and from their places of worship and their homes, and they became one people so much so that nobody could tell them apart, for their hearts were one and their love for the Lord, the Most High God was one. Now since the time of the mission of the three righteous brothers, Hadjaneck, Misamaneck and Shiznar, six hundred years had passed and the people grew strong and mighty, but at this time of great wealth and growth among the people a great sin came upon the people and covered the whole land and it was the sin of pride. Now because of the pride that swelled their hearts they thought they were mightier then their neighbours. Because of the pride in their hearts the people thought their homes and - 41 - temples and places of worship were mightier than the those of the People of Ridnon and the People of Ridnon thought that their temples were mightier than the People of Lights, and because of this pride they stopped thinking as one people and they acted as two separate peoples and their hearts grew hard towards their neighbours. At this time the people of the believers of the Lord of Heaven, which were many upon the land, went forth testifying unto the people and telling them that they should come unto the Lord and be forgiven for their sins. Now it was Six hundred years since the great mission of the three righteous brothers to the lands of the north or the lands of Ridnon and at this time a great cloud covered the whole land and that cloud took the form of war, famine, pestilence and violence. Now the people had been warned many times not to stray from the path of the Almighty God for if they did they would be destroyed. At this great and terrible time, the hearts of the people were not turned to God but to war and the war that ragged upon the land was the First Great War of the people. Now because the people had not turned their hearts to God they made war one against the other, and the people separated in to factions, and the People of Light fought the People of Ridnon for the space of many years, even five years. The land became red with blood and the people fought one with another. In the midst of this darkness and this murder there stood a man, Ananan. Ananan was a great man and he was a great leader of men, for he was the commander of the armies of Ridnon and he was greatly favoured of the Lord. And he stood at the head of his forces and he rode forward into the centre of the field of battle, and the armies of - 42 - Light were arrayed on the opposite side. Ananan cried with a loud voice saying, “Oh people, what have we done? We have destroyed the great principles of our God. We have taken many peoples lives and we have taken many great and wonderful places of worship and we have destroyed them, and in doing this the Lord has withdrawn his spirit from the whole land and we are bathed in the blood of our brothers and our sisters. This must come to an end or else we will be wiped from the face of the whole land. We must forgive ourselves and ask Almighty God for his forgiveness, so that we may walk in his light once again. For if we do not humble ourselves and ask for his forgiveness we will no longer be his people, we will become the people of darkness and the people of the evil one.” Now when Ananan had finished speaking his words, many of the people gathered for war fell down and asked for forgiveness for their sins, for they knew that they had sinned against the Lord and they knew that they had done the things of the evil one. Now I, Jeraneck, say unto you, that this was the first of the many wars that plagued our land and our people, and this was the first war that the people had ever waged one with another, and it was a great war and a terrible one and many people died, men, women and children fell to the plague of this great war and it was while I was in my youth that I was told these things and it was the manner of the teachers of my people that they would teach the young these things, so that we might better understand that the evil one brings about hatred, that he starts wars. We were taught so that we might be able to live in a time without war. - 43 - Now I, Jeraneck, say this that my people did not learn and the war that is ragging outside, of this chamber and this temple in which I sit and compile this record, is the mightiest and bloodiest of all the wars that my people have ever fought. This war is a war of annihilation, for this war is not fought over Gold or Silver or Zenrion but it is a war that is fought for nothing more than the love of bloodshed. But even now, if my people would turn their hearts to their God, they might be saved. But they rely upon their own strength for victory and not their God. Now I say this in warning, that the many wars that plague your time have plagued my time and the outcome will be the same and the people of your time will cry with a loud voice, “Oh lord, why have you forsaken us?” Just as my people now cry, but they will not see that it is they that have forsaken him. Now I return to the record of the history of my people. When the People of Light and the People of Ridnon had made an end of their violence and their wars, they came together as one people. They came together and sat in the great council chamber of the great temple on the plains of Shainnon and they spoke with one voice and they said to one-another that the fighting and the blood shed must stop forever, and there must be peace upon the land. Now there arose in the land at this time, a Prophet, who was anointed in his calling by God, and he acted as the Prophet of the people and he was a descendent of Sharanack, even the same Sharanack that led the people to the land and was told that he would not taste death. His name was Seeraneck, and he was a great man, for he loved the people and he loved the Lord and he loved the welfare - 44 - of his fellow men above all else, and because he had not picked up the sword or the bow or the spear, or any other weapon of war to fight in the great war, he had no blood upon his hands, for he had cried peace unto the people and it was his example that inspired Ananan to give his speech to the armies and because of this the people loved him for it. Seeraneck stood in the midst of the great council chamber and he said with a loud voice so that all could hear him, “I am the Prophet ordained and anointed by God. I with the aid of God will solve the problems of our people. I command you in the name of the Almighty to cry repentance unto him and ask him now in this great chamber for forgiveness for the evil that you have done and he will again bless our people.” And the captains of the armies of both sides fell and wept for they knew that they had blood on their hands, and thy cried unto Seeraneck and asked him to ask the Almighty if he might forgive them of the things they had done, and Seeraneck cried unto the Almighty and asked the Lord to forgive the people, and at this time the spirit of the Lord fell upon him and it moved him and he knew that the Lord was satisfied and had forgiven the people of their sins. But the Lord had a warning that he wished Seeraneck to give to the people, and he caused Seeraneck to speak and he warned the people that if they strayed from the paths of righteousness and picked up the sword in anger that the Lord would smite the people, and he warned them that if they continued to hate one another that the day would come when the people would no longer exist upon this land. After the people heard these words they were overcome with sorrow and their hearts became heavy and - 45 - they all cried with one voice saying, “Oh Lord, forgive our transgression, forgive us for the sake of our children.” - 46 - CHAPTER ELEVEN Raynon’s Reign Begins The time came when the people began to be filled with spirit of the Lord once again, and they cried unto the Almighty One of Heaven in their temples and places of worship, and they cried in their homes, and they became one people again upon the land. And they began again to mix one with another and to trade and celebrate and to worship together, and they began to be one with the Lord and with each other. Now one hundred years passed since the great war ended and peace again ruled the land and Seeraneck was still the Prophet of the people and he still cried repentance unto them, and the time came when the People of Light and the People of Ridnon and Limndon did not call themselves by different names but they called themselves People of the Most High God, but I will refer to them in this record as two separate people, the People of Light and the People of Ridnon and Limndon. The people lived together for the space of many years in peace, and their horse herds grew strong, and their fields yielded many great crops, and there armies grew strong, but there was still peace upon the land. It was in the one hundred and fiftieth year of peace upon the land, that the Prophet Seeraneck came unto the people. He began to be very old and his sight had failed him. And he could not see and he spoke unto the people saying, “We, the People of the Most High God have lived together in peace for the space of many years, and now I come before you, for my eyes have failed me and my age has the better - 47 - of me. Now who am I to appoint in my place.” And the Lord spoke unto him and told him a name and it was the name of difference unto the people, and Seeraneck said unto the people, “It is Raynon.” And Raynon stepped forward, and Raynon was a young man and his age was that of sixteen years. And he stepped forward and he said unto the Prophet, “I am but a young child, I cannot be the anointed one.” And the Prophet Seeraneck said unto Raynon, “You are the chosen one, you are the one that the Lord has chosen. Step forward and I will anoint you.” So it was that Raynon stepped forward and was anointed as the new Prophet. But upon this the people became confused, for they did not understand why the Lord had chosen such a young child to be their Prophet. Many days passed and the people grew disaffected by what the Prophet Seeraneck had done, and Seeraneck died and the people buried him along with all the other Prophets of the people. Raynon now became the Prophet of the people, and he caused that all the elders and high priests be gathered to the great council chamber, and he stood and spoke to the gathered priesthood and he said these words, “The Lord has anointed me to be your Prophet and your leader, and it is through him that I shall draw my strength. But it is through you, the people, that the many great things the Lord wants to accomplish will be done.” When he had finished talking to the gathered priesthood they stood and they shouted praise unto Raynon, for he was just a young boy and the Lord Almighty had made him a man, for they knew that he spoke the words of God. Now I, Jeraneck, make known unto you, that Raynon is my forefather, and it is through him that the - 48 - prophetic gift has been given unto my family and therefore to me. Raynon was a great Prophet, and during his time he commanded that the armies go forth upon the land and find more land for the people to inhabit, for the people had become mighty and their cities were swollen with numerous peoples, and Raynon commanded that new lands be found for the people to inhabit. Raynon commanded the armies to go forth and find new lands and to take with them four missionaries to preach to the armies, and also to take the teachings of the Almighty Lord to any new people they may find. The captain of the armies at this time was man called Lioana, and he was a great man, and he led the armies in righteousness and he did the will of Raynon and the Lord, and the armies saw this and they followed him with full heart, and they loved him and they loved that he loved the Lord. Now Lioana went forth under the direction of Raynon, and he and the armies marched for the space of fifty days. They went north into the lands of the People of Ridnon and beyond. As they went north the weather became cold and the days were dark and the days were short, and at this time the men of the armies feared that the Lord had abandoned them. Now the four missionaries, who’s names I am not permitted to write at this time, went forth unto the armies and confirmed to them that they had crossed into a land that was not known to them, but it was known to the Almighty, and this land was a dark land but it was a land that the Lord had blessed unto the people. The armies under the direction of Lioana made fortification upon the land, and it took sixty days to build the fortification, and when the fortification was built - 49 - Lioana commanded that one hundred men be left behind while the greater part of the armies go forth upon the land and march south, back to the great City of Light and unto the Prophet. When they returned they made their way to the council chamber of the Prophet Raynon, and Raynon was moved by the Lord, for the Lord told him that the land that Lioana had found was a good land, and a land that their people might expand and become strong. Raynon sent out amongst the people a decree asking for people to go north with the armies to settle the new land, and the people responded to their Prophet, and many took the walk north with Lioana and the armies. And so it was that in the days of the Prophet Raynon that the people did indeed make this new land a great land, for they farmed and built many beautiful buildings, and they made the land beautiful. And their children grew strong and became mighty men and women, true believers in the Almighty. - 50 - CHAPTER TWELVE The Unrighteous Brothers Now it was during the great migration northward to the new lands that Raynon stood before the council and he was thirty years in age and he called for the descendants of Hadjaneck, Misamaneck and Shiznar to make themselves known to the council that was gathered. Now the descendants of Hadjaneck, Misamaneck and Shiznar were like unto their forefathers in only one way, for they were men of exploration and they wished to go forth and find new lands for the people. But they had a secret in their heart and the Prophet Raynon knew of this secret, for the Lord had told him in a vision. Now the Prophet called them forward and they stood as their forefathers had done on the Urim and the Thummim in the great council chamber and the Prophet stood before them and said, “The Lord has moved me to call this council for these servants that stand before us are the descendants of Hadjaneck, Misamaneck and Shiznar. And they have a secret in their hearts and they have covered that secret with the wish to find new lands for the people. Now I say unto this council that these men wish to find their forefathers even the very one named Lioneck, they wish to find his people and to know of their fate. For the Lord has revealed to me, his anointed one, that their intentions are of God and they are to go forth upon the sea and find their forefathers people. But a warning I give unto them, that if they stray from the teachings of God they will be cut of from his presence.” When Raynon had finished talking to - 51 - the council the three brothers whose names are Anonock, Rismaneck and Asaneck spoke saying, “We wish to go not only to find our lost people but to bring them unto the Almighty God. We wish to find new teachings and new goods that we may trade with them. Our thoughts are for the people.” Raynon knew in his heart that they were not truthful unto the council but he held his tongue and he permitted the brothers to go and find their people because the Lord had told him that it was to be. Now at this time a representative from the People of Ridnon stood forth and argued that this was not a wise thing and it should not be done for it was written that Lioneck was a wicked man and he feared that if Lioneck’s people knew of the location of this land they would come upon them and bring war and destruction upon them. Now Raynon said unto Ishnon that he had heard his concerns and he said. “The Lord of hosts is with us and if we be obedient unto him no one will come unto our land and destroy us, but if we should fall away into darkness then it matters not for we will deserve that destruction.” And Raynon commanded them to go on their journey and the three brothers departed from the council chamber. Now the brothers made their journey east toward the seashore and to the great harbour of Neshon. For by the time of this journey the people had expanded all over the land and they had built ports from whence to sail and they had built towns around about the ports so that they might fish the ocean sea. And the three brothers made their way to a ship that the Prophet had commissioned for their journey and they boarded the ship and they commanded the Captain to sail east. Now the Captain of the ship was called Wisneck and he was a well known sea man, for he had mapped all of the southern seashore for - 52 - the people and he had been given command by the Prophet to sail with the brothers east and to travel with them and to make maps and to keep a small record of their journey so that the people might be able to read it. Now I, Jeraneck, have the record kept by Wisneck and it is from this record that I give an account of the events that took place. Now, they were sailing for many days, even seven days, and as they sailed east the weather became cold and the seas rough and the ship became trapped in ice and Wisneck ordered that all but a few take their journey on the ice and to the main land, and this they did and for six days they walked across the frozen sea and on to land. Now Wisneck makes note that the three brothers became weary of their journey and began to complain against God, and Wisneck stood tall and rebuked them and commanded them to repent for they had been protected by the Lord and it was him who had led them to the lands of the east. And the three brothers openly repented but it says that they did not show the actions of repentant men. In the forth month of their journey they came upon a people who were fair and who rode on the back of the horse and who looked familiar to them, and the three brothers told them of their journey and told them a little of their history and the people spoke to them and they called themselves the Great Ones. And they said unto them that they too had heard of a history like that which the brothers had told them and they invited the travellers to go with them to their village. Now when the brothers and their travelling companions arrived at the village they were taken with - 53 - surprise for they had never seen a village like it. There were no buildings of wood or stone and there were no great temples or places of worship but there were many tents, there were tents upon tents and many horses and Wisneck says that they moved about upon the land and their people were hard and fierce, for he says that they had fought many wars among themselves. Now the brothers and their companions were taken to the largest of the tents and they were commanded to sit and eat and this they did. And as they were eating and taking comfort a man came unto them and his name was Lioneck and it was the manner of the people to call their people after their first great leader, and it was this that confirmed to the three brothers and their companions that these were indeed the people of Lioneck, and that they were related. Now I say that the three brothers spent two days talking with the leader of the people and they spent two days celebrating and singing and dancing and during this time they told each other of the history of their people, and it was at this time that the leader of the people of Lioneck stood and he said with a loud voice so that the three brothers and their companions became afraid, “I am a true descendent of Lioneck the great, and it was he who was the true heir to the kingdom, and we as his children are the rightful rulers of your kingdom. So I will assemble my forces and my people and we will go unto your land and we shall take it and we shall make ourselves your rulers, for it is we who are truly your Gods. I will march west with my great horsemen and we will tear down your buildings and we shall destroy your places of worship to your God, and I will cause that your women be taken captive and your children wiped from the earth so that - 54 - only my people and the true descendants of the promise will rule.” Now the three brothers became afraid for their lives and they begged Lioneck that they might be able to stay and live amongst his people and for this they would tell him all he needed to know of their people. Wisneck says that at this time he stood before them and Lioneck, and the power of the Lord came upon him and he said these words unto them, “The Lord Almighty will not allow these things for we are his chosen people. For you will travel west for many years and you will lose many men and your women will bare no children and your great horse herd will die and your people will suffer and they will quench their thirst on the blood of their children. And all this will be done because you have gone astray from the ways of the Almighty and I do say to you that you will never see the land of my people. Now the Almighty has told me these things in the spirit of prophecy and he will not allow this to happen.” Now when he had finished speaking Lioneck was afraid and he cried out that he would march west that night and he called for his guards to seize hold of Wisneck, and as he did there arose a great storm and it came upon the camp and it rained down great balls of ice upon them and it destroyed many horses and many tents but Wisneck was swift and he fled the village of Lioneck and the Lord made it possible for him to ride a horse away to safety, and he rode for 5 days and he walked for three months until he came to the sea, and he came upon his ship and the Lord blessed his journey home to the Land of Light. And this is where his record of the events ends and now I go back to the record kept by the record keepers of the people. - 55 - Now Raynon heard the tale of Wisneck in the great council chamber, and all the high priests gathered were afraid that these people might come upon them and find them and do all the things that Wisneck had told them of, and the Prophet stood and he held aloft his hands and said, “The Lord has made it known unto me that these people will not come upon this land. That we will not endure the things that they have promised to do unto us. But he has warned us to tell our children that they must remain faithful for this promise to remain.” I, Jeraneck, say unto you that I do not know the fate of the three brothers and their companions but it has been taught me by my mother that they were never heard of again. But we now know that the people that swarm our land are the people of Lioneck and I now know that our armies have been told that they have great knowledge of our places of worship and our cites and our great highways and I suppose that the three brothers did indeed do what they promised and told the people of Lioneck about our people. A warning I give that all those that stray from the paths of the Almighty Lord of Heaven are in the grip of the evil one and he is waiting to drag you down to hell. - 56 - CHAPTER THIRTEEN The Second Great War Many years passed and the people went about their lives and they worshiped the Lord and they spread themselves upon the land and while they were farming the new land of the north they came across a people and their name was Morion and their leader was also called Morion and they were a wise people. The history of the people of Morion is joined with that of Araneck the first great prophet of the people. Morion was a high priestess of her people and highly favoured of the Lord. Now I say that she was not a Prophet but a woman close to the Most High and very favoured of the Almighty. Their history is not know fully unto me but I Jeraneck say this concerning the people of Morion that they were already on this land when our people came to it many thousands of years ago and it was not until the time of the settling of the lands of the north that our people came upon them. For she had taken her people north to explore the land and they had become cut off. Now when Morion had heard about the many great things of the People of Light she was desirest that she be taken before the Prophet of the people. Now she did take her journey south unto the great city of the people and she did stand before the Prophet Raynon and she was taken hold of by the spirit and so was Raynon that they fell in love and upon her request her people became joined with our people and they were joined together in marriage and - 57 - this is how her people were joined with the children of Araneck and thus the people became one upon the land. Now I Jeraneck say that our people were one and because we were one all the houses were now able to sit in council and those houses were Isnah, Ridnon, Cisaneck, Morion, and Limndon. And it was our unity that allowed these houses to sit together and to govern our people. For now the people were one it was required that the Prophet be concerned with the dealings of God and of the church among the people and it was required that the houses in council be concerned with the day to day welfare of the people. Now I Jeraneck once again return to the compiling of this record and I now make an account of the Second Great War of my people and the blood shed and the harvest of souls that came about. I will make a full account of this part of the history of my people for it is this Second Great War that shaped the world in which I grew and it shaped the world for many of my people and I have been commanded of an Angel to make a full account of the things that happened during this great harvest of souls so that you may know that when people stray from God completely they are over taken by a dark and unholy power. The Second Great War or the great harvest of souls as it has become know amongst my people started many years before I was born and many years before my father was born. But it was in the time of my fathers farther for my fathers father was in the prime of his youth for he was sixteen years in to his life upon the land when the great - 58 - trouble started. Now I Jeraneck record the story of the Second Great War that made it possible for the war that is raging in my time. I say that it was through the Second Great War that our people become wicked and it is through this war that the fuller part of the people turned away from the Almighty God and it is through this war that the five houses of the people became shattered and it is through this war that a great harvest of souls came about and a great blood shed so that our lands became vulnerable and they became weak so that the people of the east could more easily come upon us. Now I begin the record and the sorry tale of the second blood shed of my people. For it was in the third thousand year of the people being upon the land that the great trouble started among the people. The people were living in the time of the Prophet Rendanoneck and Rendanoneck was not a great prophet for he loved himself more than he loved God. And he took many wives unto himself and he loved the company of vile women who would sell themselves to him for pleasure. And he loved the company of men who would shower him with great gifts in exchange for title and land. And he took houses and land from the poor among the people and gave them to his many women and to his many followers. Now all those that would not do as he commanded he would have put to death openly. And many things he did that were not pleasing unto the Lord. Now it was in this time that the five heads of the houses of the people gathered to discuss the problem of the Prophet Rendanoneck and it was during this time that Rendanoneck went in to the lower room of the great temple and with his many women defiled it and took from it the spirit of the Most High. While he was - 59 - about this the spirit came upon the council and they knew that the temple had been defiled. Now they cast votes and with one voice they removed Rendanoneck from his position. On the next day Rendanoneck called for a great gathering in the council chamber for all the people of the city. The great council chamber was full and many people could not get in, and it must be made known that this was the first time that the people had been called to gather in the great council chamber, for it was the law that only the Elders and the Priests of the church were to gather in the council chamber. Now Rendanoneck was not a foolish man but he was a man of the world and he filled the council chamber with his friends and his followers so that their voices would be heard over those that opposed him. Now it was at this time that Rendanoneck stood before the people and spoke unto them and he said. “I am the Prophet of this people. I am the leader of the chosen race. I am like unto God, for if I command it, it shall be done. And I say that we are the chosen people. For our armies are strong and our weapons are mighty and I say that it is time that we take back our lands that have been taken form us by people not of our blood. I say that we need to rid ourselves of all the people that joined them selves with our race and we make ourselves pure again. We will take back what is ours, we will take back what has been taken form us, we will take back our race and our blood so that it is clean. And we will destroy the God of those people for we worship a God that is not of our people and it is forced upon us to worship that God. Now let our anger be poured out upon these plagues of people for they are lower than the lowest thing that creeps upon - 60 - the earth, let us spill their blood so that it may cleanse our land”. When he had finished speaking a great cheer arose from those that were gathered and they wanted bloodshed more than they wanted the love of God. It was during this great commotion that the heads of the five houses stood and they called upon the Elders and Priests of the church to remove Rendanoneck from his office as Prophet. And the head of the house of Cisaneck stood forth and he said. “The words that Rendanoneck speaks are the words of the evil one, for Rendanoneck does not speak the words of the Almighty One of Heaven and he does not have the spirit of the Most High upon him. I call for his removal from office and for his imprisonment. For he speaks the words of a murderer and the words of a tyrant and we do not wish for blood to be spilt upon the ground” When Rendanoneck heard these words he became angry and he called for his guards and his guards took hold of all those that had called for his removal form the office of Prophet and he ordered that they be killed before his eyes. Now I say that this was done with full force and many died and much blood was spilt upon the floor of the great council chamber in the temple. And it was a fuller part of the people of the chamber that helped in this and so the great struggle had started. Rendanoneck was an evil man and he took delight in this and he called for all those that did not believe him to be killed and driven form the land. Now he killed all of the heads of the five houses, but two and the heads of the houses of Isnah and Ridnon fled with a great many people to the lands of Ridnon Now two years went by and the people who fled north prepared for war and they prayed unto God that he would deliver them from this wickedness that was upon - 61 - the land. The people who had fled north with the heads of the house of Isnah and of Ridnon desired that a Prophet be chosen among them and Disnah who was the head of the house of Isnah was chosen to be their Prophet but he was not chosen by the people as Rendanoneck had been but by the ministering of Angels and by the voice of God. Now the people called themselves followers of Christ and they prepared themselves for war so that they might protect themselves form the armies of Rendanoneck. Now they made great weapons and they cast iron and made many shields and swords and axes and spears and they put about their body’s armour and about their horses the same and they were protected from their heard to their feet with armour which the people called the armour of God and they grew in to a large force and they went forth unto battle and met with the armies of Rendanoneck. Now when they met the armies of Rendanoneck they became frightened and their souls trembled for the armies of Rendanoneck were like nothing that they had seen before. They were a great number in as much as they out numbered the armies of God by five thousand for the number of men that Rendanoneck had sent to do battle was forty thousand and they were arrayed in the skins of beasts of the forest and their heads were covered in blood and their hair was decorated with the parts of the dead and they covered their horses in blood and they fastened the heads of their victims to the front of their horses and they were rejoicing in the bloodshed that they would soon partake of. And the people of God trembled for they feared the evil that stood before them. Rendanoneck’s men were well equipped with the sword the axe the spear the bow and the arrow and the horse and they had machines of war unlike that which had - 62 - ever been seen and they had the Raznick and this was the most deadly of weapons at it looked like unto a beast of the forest and it issued balls of fire from its mouth. The armies of Rendanoneck came unto battle with banners to a God of War. They had fallen away from the true teaching of the gospel and the church and they prayed unto many Gods but their main God was a God of War and they called this God of War Odinon and Rendanoneck’s people prayed to him for victory rather than to the Almighty. And the armies of Rendanoneck fell to their knees and cried aloud saying “Odinon will protect us. Odinon will bless our swords so that they may strike down the believers of Christ. Odinon will spill the blood of our enemies” And this was the way of the worshipers of Odinon that they stoned the followers of Christ and offered them as sacrifice unto Odinon and they wished to wipe them from off the land. And they wished to cast down the followers of Christ into the eternal darkness and to be captive of their God of Darkness Hajar. Now the followers of Christ who were arrayed on the other side of the valley were indeed righteous. For it was through them that a record of this great war was preserved and it was through them that the records of the people were kept from destruction and it is thanks to them that I do now compile this record, for it was through them that the ways of the Almighty were preserved upon this land. The armies of Christ were arrayed in great armour and they had weapons. Their weapons were also great and they were met to do battle. The two armies were arrayed on two sides of a great valley called Limndon for it was named after the people of the same name and it was a mighty valley with trees and small hills and it was there - 63 - that the people met to do battle. As they were waiting to commence the battle the skies grew black and lighting jumped across the sky and snow fell from the sky and the ground became wet and the snow became deep for the snow gathered around their feet. Now the armies of Rendanoneck started to beat their swords upon their shields and they started to sing unto Odinon and at this time the armies of God became afraid and the captain of the army’s of God rode forward on his horse and his horse was arrayed with all manor of armour and upon the armour was written these words. “We fight for our God, our Prophet and our Religion” and this was the standard by which the armies of God fought. For they were not fighting for riches or gold or for their own edification but they were fighting for their belief and for their God. It mattered not to them weather their houses were burned or their fields destroyed because they knew that the Almighty was with them and he would stand by them for they were fighting for him. And the captain of the armies of God was called Zinon and Zinon rode forward to the centre of the field of battle and he held aloft his sword and he cried saying “Oh God of Heaven oh God of Earth bless thy people that we may be victories on this day that we may have our Religion restored and our Freedom restored. For we fight for thee, we fight for the Religion that you have given us and we fight so the honour may be yours” Now as Zinon was doing this the leader of the armies of Rendanoneck rode forward and he came unto Zinon and he rode unto the side of Zinon and he mocked Zinon and told him that he would feast upon the flesh of his children and ravish his wife when the battle was won. And Zinon said unto Aktar the captain of the armies of Rendanoneck. “We do not fight for your land. We do not fight for your - 64 - possessions. We do not even fight for the temples you have taken form us. We do not fight you for the places of worship that you have robbed us of .We do not fight for any of the earthly gifts that you have. We fight for the freedom to worship we fight for the freedom to pray and we fight for our God and we fight for our Religion” When he had finished speaking unto Aktar Zinon rode back to his armies and prepared himself for the bloodshed to come and he rallied his men saying “Who shall die this day to be with the Saviour of this world. Who shall be with him at his right hand who among you is worthy enough to enter in to his eternal rest and stand with the Father and the Son and bear witness of the things we have done. We fight for him, we fight for our Religion. Now in his name let us go forward and return to our people the freedom that has been taken from us” With this the battle commenced and Zinon commanded his archers from the back of his lines to fire three times and give cover to the horse guard which numbered many thousand while they rode forward. And the horse guard rode forward with spears and with swords and they rode forward and they came upon the lines of the worshipers of Odinon. Now I will refer to the heathen as the worshipers of Odinon for they truly were lost to God. Now the horse guard struck into the lines of the worships of Odinon and they hit them with a fierce force and as they did this the lighting struck the ground and made a fire come up behind the horse guard. Now the lines of Odinon held and they thought that Odinon had sent the fire to consume the horse guard. And the horse guard were struck with great force by the lines of Odinon and they were repelled and they rode back to their lines in a panicked state. Upon seeing this Zinon commanded a volley of fire arrows to be struck in to the lines of Odinon - 65 - and the fire arrows rained down upon them with great force so much so that the worshipers of Odinon fell to the ground in great numbers and there blood soaked the ground and turned the snow red with blood and they cried to their God to deliver them and the snow and the blood was heavy upon the ground and there was no man on the field of battle that was not covered by the blood and the snow. The mud and the blood and the snow reached their knees and in places it was impossible to stand and it seemed that the Lord was truly with the armies of the people of Christ. Zinon then commanded his infantry to move forward and they moved forward and they carried with them sword and axe and shield. Now they ran into the lines of the worshipers of Odinon and at the same time the remainder of the horse guard rode forward on the right and left side so that they encircled the forces of Odinon. And they gave them a great and bloody battle and the commander of the forces of Odinon commanded his forces to move forward. And he commanded that his Raznick be taken to the hill to his left, and this they did and the forces of Odinon did move forward and they gave a great bloody slaughter to the forces of the people of Christ for they were a savage people and they did not stop until they had breached the lines so that they feel upon the back lines of the worships of Christ. Zinon seeing this commanded that his horse guard retreat and take flight to the north and Zinon rode forward to rally his forces and as he did this the Raznick thundered and a great ball of fire came toward the forces of Christ and it fell upon them. Now Zinon ordered his men to fall back to their lands and to return to their city. And so they did, and the forces of Odinon fell upon all that were left and they soaked the ground with the blood of their victims. As they saw the remainder of the - 66 - forces of Christ flee they shouted with one voice unto their God of War Odinon, “Odinon the great you have led us to victory we offer these bodies as a sacrifice. And we drink their blood in your honour and we swear on our lives that upon this night we will feast upon their children and we shall take away their women” And the sky grew clear and the sun shone and the forces of Odinon thought that their God had indeed answered their prayer and they grew mighty in spirit and they went forth in pursuit of the people of Christ. Now I Jeraneck say that I have been to the valley of this great battle and I have beheld the remains of the battle and it filled my heart with sadness for I was in my youth and I could not understand why we had done this thing, but I say it was because a smaller part of the people rejected their God. Now Zinon returned unto the great city of Ridnon and he commanded the Prophet Disnah and the head of the house of Ridnon to Flee with them north for the armies had lost the field and the worshipers of Odinon were coming to take away their women and to destroy their seed. And the Prophet stood forth and gathered the people together and they fled north and the Prophet commanded Zinon to follow for he was head of the armies and a great warrior and the people needed him. And there stood among the people others who would not leave for they were desirest that they would fight so that the larger part of the people may get to the Northlands. And these people would not leave the place of their ancestors and they would rather fight for their land. So they waited many hours for a sign of the forces of Odinon and they waited with their wives and their children and they prayed that they might not be able to live but to give time to the - 67 - people that fled north and they knew in their hearts that they would not live but they took courage for they knew that they would meet their Lord. Now the forces of Odinon marched forward in to the lands that are known to us as the land of Ridnon and they came across the great tower that the three mighty missionary brothers had camped at and at this sacred site they made human offering unto their God and they did eat the flesh of their victims and they did defile the tower with their bodies. Now upon this they took great strength and they marched forward in to the city and they went from house to house and burned them. As they went from house to house they went looking for the fair women of Christ so that they might carry them off in to captivity and that they might take away their virtue. And they went from building to building and the city became engulfed in fire. Now the people of Christ who had stayed behind made them selves know unto the forces of Odinon. And they gave them battle, and their number was two hundred and they fought well and they gave the forces of Odinon a sore battle and the fight was bloody and fierce and upon the defeat of the people of Christ a soldier of the forces of Odinon brought forth a prisoner whose name was Linker. Now he brought him unto the captain of their forces. Now the captain of the forces was Aktar and he commanded to know where the people had gone. And he commanded to know where the forces commanded by Zinon had fled. And the prisoner Linker would not tell Aktar and with this Aktar brought before Linker the women of the people of Christ and he commanded that his men defile the women. With this Aktar forced Linker to watch and with this Linker called upon the Lord of heaven to deliver him from his enemy and the Lord did indeed listen to him and he - 68 - gave unto Linker great strength so that he could over power his captors and with this the Lord did indeed deliver him from his enemies. And Linker fled before Aktar and he fled into the wilderness around about the city of Ridnon and he did make his way unto the forces of Christ and he did tell them of the death and the destruction and he did tell them of the murder of the children and the defiling of their women. Now Aktar commanded that a feast take place and he commanded that sacrifice be made to Odinon and they offered the children of Christ to Odinon and they drank their blood and ate their flesh and they defiled their women and ravished their bodies. And this was their way for they had truly departed form the light in to the darkness. - 69 - CHAPTER FOURTEEN The Second Great War Comes to an End Now I Jeraneck say that it must needs be that a record be kept of all the souls that were harvested and sent unto the Father and the Son. Their number was two hundred thousand men, women and children and they were taken from around about the city of Ridnon and from all over the land. Now I say that many things were done unto them that can not be written upon these plates for they are not pleasing unto the Lord and I have been commanded not to write them. Now I Jeraneck continue the record of the Second Great War that was waged upon the land, but I say this, that war has never served any purpose other than to harvest souls to send unto the Father and the Son and this is what the people did during the Second Great War. Now it was during the eighth year of the war that raged upon the land that the followers of Odinon and the armies of Rendanoneck began to push for final victory, for they had moved upon all the land so that there was little place for the followers of Christ to flee. And it was about this time that they sent forth a letter unto the followers of Christ and the armies of Zinon to meet them in battle at the river of Hodiea and it was proposed that they meet for one last great battle to decide who would hold sway over the land. Aktar wrote that they were to meet when the river was high and this was to be at the end of the rainy season. Now the people of Christ had fled north and they had gone far north even on to new islands and upon these new - 70 - islands they had built many monuments and they had built unto them selves a small temple so that they could worship their God and they had filled the islands that they were upon and they were safe for any one coming unto them in battle would have to cross the seas. Now this was the reason for the letter being sent unto Zinon for Aktar knew that he could not cross the seas for Odinon forbade it and Aktar demanded blood. Now Zinon under the direction of the Prophet Disnah called all of the armies of Christ together and he prepared them for war but it is recorded that their numbers were few and Zinon called upon all men and women to fight along with their children. And so it is written that all those that could hold a sword, shield, spear or any other weapon of war were required to join with the army and fight. And this was the manner in which the people of the Almighty prepared for battle. And they moved from their islands leaving only a small group behind and they went south and they rode for the space of many days and when the rainy season had stopped they found that the Lord had led them unto the field of battle. Now I Jeraneck say that this was the last great battle of the Second Great War that raged upon this land. And I make it known that it was the most bloody of all the battles. And this battle led to a time of peace and that peace led to my time and now I record upon this plate the last great and terrible battle of the Second Great War, but it must be made clear that although this battle led to a great slaughter and harvest of souls the battle that is raging out side of the temple in my time is far more destructive and bloody. Now I say that the people were gathered to war one side against the other and they were arrayed in battle - 71 - armour men women and even children and they met at the river Hodiea. The worshipers of Odinon gathered their armies together and they had a great horse heard and they out numbered the armies of Zinon four men to one and they gathered on the right side of the river and they were situated atop of a hill and the armies of Zinon were on the left of the river with a forest to their backs and the river of Hodiea separated the two armies. Now there was a Coresent over the river and upon this Coresent were towers and it was the way of the people of that time to pay to cross the river. Now the two armies were gathered to do battle and the armies of Rendanoneck and the worshipers of Odinon began to shout at the armies of Zinon and they shouted at them saying. “Your women are tender to hold and your children are flavoursome to eat. Now we are the mighty we are the strong and we feast upon the week and we do it with a song. Odinon Oh Odinon we thank thee for or strength” Now the armies of the people of Christ stood firm and Zinon led them and he did so in the name of the Almighty, and he rode out at the head of his people and spoke these words. “It is for our God we fight this day for if we should fall upon this field today then the whole land will slip in to darkness, and the precepts of the Almighty will be lost forever. And if we fail this day the records that we have kept and our many religious practices will become a thing of nought and they will be lost for all time. And the remainder of the people that will be left will slip in to an age of darkness, murder and hatred. So it is down to us to be victorious this day not for our own sakes but for the sake of our children and their children, so they may worship the Almighty in love and freedom. Are we willing to fight for him” With this the army gave out a great cheer - 72 - of “Hosanna, Hosanna, Hosanna to the Most High” With this he led his forces forward. Now Zinon’s armies were arrayed thus. At his rear were four battalions of archers in the middle of his forces were many men upon horse back and on the right were many men with swords, axes, spears and shields and on his left were the remainder of his forces witch were made up of men, women and children. And they to were given swords, axes and shields and they were arranged in an arch with the horse guard in the centre and Zinon leading from the front. Now The armies of the worshipers of Odinon were arrayed thus, for they had no armour about them except for their commander Aktar, for they were arrayed only in a cloth about their loins, and the skins of the beasts of the forest and their faces were covered in the blood of their victims and their hair was drenched in the blood of the children and the women who they had raped and murdered and the same was to be said of their hands expect they had the parts of the children upon their fingers. And their weapons were painted red so that it might frighten the armies of God. But the armies of God did not fear them for they were arrayed in armour of Silver and Copper and Zanton and they were covered from head to foot so that they might be protected from the blows of the weapons of the worshipers of Odinon. Still the worshipers of Odinon seeing that the forces of Zinon had made great ground toward the Coresent moved down from their position on the hill and they had started to approach the Coresent and they knew as did Zinon’s forces that who ever held the Coresent would win the battle and ultimately the war. So the worshipers of Odinon moved forward with great speed and they approached the Coresent and they thought that they would take it with ease and they lowered there shields - 73 - and walked toward the Coresent. But unknown to them hidden in the towers of the Coresent were soldiers of the forces of Christ and when the worshipers of Odinon approached the Coresent they let fly with arrows of fire and they rained down upon the armies of Aktar and they became confused for they did not know were the arrows were coming from. Aktar seeing this from the hill rode down at the head of his forces and began to rally them and he pushed forward until he came to the entrance of the Coresent and he cast his eyes toward the other side of the Coresent and he beheld the forces of Zinon and he began to move his people on to the Coresent. Now the Coresent was old and it was beginning to heave at the weight that was put upon it and it cracked in the middle and feel in to two pieces. With this Aktar fell with his horse in to the river and he began to drown for the weight of his armour was more than he could bear. Zinon saw this and commanded his forces to cross the river and upon this they reached the other side and gave battle to the forces of Odinon. And they made a figure of two circles around them and they gave great battle and I include in this record the words of Zinon that say. “Although the armies of Odinon were wicked and despised of God they did fight well and with much strength”. I now return to making an account of the battle. Now the battle went on for the space of many hours and much blood was spilt so much so that the river became red with the blood of all those that had fallen and the records say that the ground was so heavy with blood that it stuck to everything they wore. Now because of the loss of Aktar the forces of Odinon began to be afraid and they became unorganised and they were being hewn down with every sword and axe and the slaughter was great and the ground - 74 - became filled with blood and the sun baked it so that it became hard and the forces of Odinon began to flee to the hill Doanw. Zinon who by this time commanded the towers that were still standing commanded that his archers fire upon the hill and that his horse guard ride in and finish of the forces of Odinon. Now when the horse guard came to the very top of the hill they found only a few of the worshippers of Odinon still alive and although only few in number even one hundred they gave battle unto the horse guard until the horse guard over powered them and they cut of their heads and they spilled their bowls upon the floor as was commanded to do to the traitors of the Almighty. Now the record says that the blood flowed down the hill and that the hill became red with blood so that the grass beneath could not be seen. Now I Jeraneck do testify that although the details of this war are bloody and evil they are nothing compared to the slaughter that is going on now, for my people have forgotten their God and the whole land is covered in the blood of the dead. And as I write this record and read about the Second Great War my heart desires that my people were as righteous as the people of Zinon. But I fear for your time more than I fear for mine, for your time will be seven times worse than mine, for your time will see great tribulation for I have seen these things and an Angle of the Almighty has shown me many things even the great sickness that will engulf your land. But I am not permitted to make an account here on these plates for this is the record of my people. But these things are to be found on the religious record. Now I return to the recording of the things of the Second Great War. - 75 - Now the horse guard signalled that the battle was won. And Zinon rode forward atop the hill Doanw and stood and raised his sword and cried with a load voice saying. “This day in the name of the Almighty One of Heaven we covenant that we will never spill a drop of blood again upon this land, and we make this covenant not just for ourselves but for our children and our children’s children. Hosanna to the most High God” With this the armies of the people of Christ shouted out Hosanna three times. Now many weeks passed and Zinon took his forces back in to the lands of their ancestors and they took with them the Prophet Disnah. Now when they were travelling from place to place and from city to city their hearts became heavy for there was much evil that had been done upon the face of the land and there were many people that lay dead and it is hard for me to write the things that they saw for their records are full of the evil that they saw, but it is sufficient for me to say that the their hearts were heavy. Now Disnah who was still the prophet of the people ordered that Zinon accompany him unto the City of Light and that he bring with him a force of one hundred men for he feared that not all the followers of Odinon had been destroyed. And they went unto the City of Light and they entered and rode down the main high way of the city unto the temple. Now the temple had been desecrated and it was adorned with all manner of things unpleasing to God. Now they entered the temple and they made their way to the great council chamber. Now when they had entered the great council chamber they found that the great Urim and Thummim had been desecrated and that the records of the people had been burned and mutilated. And - 76 - they found seated in the chair of the prophets Rendanoneck. And Disnah approached him but Rendanoneck was no more for he had died. Now during this time Disnah received a revelation as to how Rendanoneck had meet his end and it was made known unto Disnah that Rendanoneck had meet his end by murder, for Aktar had killed him by deception. For Rendanoneck wanted to sign a peace with the people of Christ but Aktar desired war. Now they looked around the room and the Prophet Disnah looked upon Rendanoneck and said these words. “Never again must we let this happen. Never again must we let this temple be defiled by our people. Never again must our people make war upon each other. I swear unto heaven that if we ever depart form the ways of the almighty again that we must be wiped from off this land” Now Disnah went about the work of copying what he could from the records that were not destroyed by the Followers of Odinon. So it was that the people came from all over the land and they swept away the decay and death from the great cities of the people of Christ. And Disnah called a great assembly and he meet the people out side of the great temple and he decreed that the Order and worship of Odinon was never to be mentioned again and he decreed that a law be made that anybody worshiping Odinon be put to death and this was the will of the Lord and it was his command and the command of Heaven. And Disnah made it known unto the people that they were all to be know as the people of Christ for they were to become one people in heart and in mind. From that day forth the people of Christ lived in peace and happiness and every one lived for everyone else. And this was how it - 77 - was until the time of my birth. For I Jeraneck was born in a time of great happiness and light. - 78 - CHAPTER FIFTEEN The Days of Jeraneck I Jeraneck do now lay upon these few plates the last days of my people and I do finish their history. I now give an account of my days upon this beautiful and pleasant land and I give an account of my life and I give an account of the destruction that is happening around about this great temple and upon this land. I Jeraneck was born to good God fearing parents. My father Isnah was a great man for he grew under the shadow of the Second Great War that covered this land, and his father had fought in the Second Great War and had seen many evil things happen to his people and it was my fathers father that had witnessed the destruction of the peoples places of worship and their homes and the many people. And it was he that witnessed what happens when the people forget their God and leave the paths of righteousness, and it was he that saw when this happens that the people become consumed with the power of the evil one. Now because of this my fathers father was one of those that covenanted with the Lord that they would remember all that had gone before and they would teach their children of these things, and they would live in righteousness. And so it was that the days that I was born in to were righteous and happy days and my father was righteous and happy for both he and my mother were worshipers of the Christ. And I say that my father could trace his line back to the great Prophet Araneck who led the people form the great tower and he lived up to his - 79 - name and to the responsibilities that were placed upon him. Now I give an account of my days upon the land and I make an account of my childhood and I make an account of my mid years and I make an account of my adult years. Now I make an account of all the things that have happened unto this people in my time upon this land and the things that led to the great destruction that is happening around me. For I sit in the great council chamber of the great temple which is the last temple that remains upon the land and it makes my heart heavy to know that this is the last temple standing upon this land. I was born in the season of the great cold when the snow covers the land and when the snow falls thick and fast. I was raised in the ways of righteousness. I learned in my childhood all I needed to know about the Almighty from my mother and I learned all the skills that I would need in my middle years from my father. It was those teachings and the example of my parents that have given me a solid foundation upon which I could grow. I do not remember much of my childhood other than it was a glories time and the people seemed to be most happy. I was a small child and a child of intrigue and all the things of God affected my mind in as much as I wondered as to how the stars stayed in their place and how the sun rose in the sky and how the many wonders that I saw around me could be so wonderful. I wondered at the manner of their life and how they worked and how they came to be. For this is a great blessing given to me by God. I wondered after the manner of the world and all the things around me. Now my father was a great teacher for he was an Elder in the church and he sat in the council chamber of the people and he met with the Prophet often and counselled with him - 80 - for he was to be chosen to be the next Prophet of the people, for my fathers brother was the Prophet at the time of my birth and my early years and there for when he died my father was to become Prophet of all the people. Now it was because of the position of my family that I was able to enter in to the record room of the great temple and study the things of the Lord and I was able to read a little of the history of my people while I was in my early years. And my father would sit with me and read me many stories about the people and about the Almighty One of Heaven and it was because of these things and the things that my mother taught me that I wondered after the manner of the Almighty. It was in this atmosphere of happiness that I grew in to my midyears. Now I give an account of my mid years and my dealings with my God and also the dealings of my people. Now it was while I was in my thirteenth year that my mind became opened unto the Lord. And I will record how I Jeraneck son of Isnah became one with the Lord. And how I became one with God. I Jeraneck being thirteen years of age was led by the spirit of the lord in to a valley and from that valley in to a great forest and while I was in this forest my mind became centred on the things of the Almighty in so much that I desired to know of many things. And it was while I was wondering in my mind that I decided to kneel and ask the Almighty for answers to all the things that I wondered after. It was while I was pouring out my heart unto the Almighty that a great light gathered and I beheld in that light a parsonage and I became afraid and I was about to get to my feet and run when the personage spoke to me and his voice was like thunder and it shook me to my very soul and I stayed kneeling upon the ground and I listened - 81 - to the personage and he said unto me. “Jeraneck behold I am the Almighty, the Lamb, the Holy One of Heaven. I come unto you in answer to the supplication of your heart. For I have watched you grew from a small child and I have seen you grow in to a great young man. For I say unto you that you are blessed of me. I say unto you that thou art my son, my friend. For you have followed me in your heart, and your actions have been at one with me. And now I say unto you remain faithful and pray unto me always and do all the things that you are commanded. For the time will come when you will be called to be the Prophet of all the people. But beware the pride of your heart, for that pride will lead you down a path to destruction. Follow me all the days of your life and I will be with you until the end of your days upon the land. You must cry repentance unto the people for they forget me in their hearts and they forget that it is I that do preserve them on the face of the land. Now you have wondered in your heart about the future events that you have read about in the records of your people. And you have wondered at the manner of their prophesying, behold Jeraneck through your faith I will show you all these things. Behold look in to the light and see the things that your heart desires.” As the personage stopped speaking to me I looked and I beheld the many dealing of my people and I beheld many great and marvels things of the Lord. Now it came to pass that when I had seen all these things I found that I was lying upon the ground and that I had indeed seen the Lord and the Almighty One of Heaven and that he had come to me a lowly person and he had talked to me and he had shown me the future of my people, and through this my spirit was filled and I knew that he was God and I could not deny it. I stayed in the forest for the - 82 - space of seven days and while I was in the forest I prayed and fasted upon the things I had been shown and how I could help my people. Now I stayed in the forest for such a long period that my mother and my father became over come with grief, for they feared that I had been taken away from them by one of the many beasts of the forest and my mother cried unto the Lord and the spirit manifest these things to me so that I knew that it was time to return unto my people. I returned to the house of my father. Now my father whose name was Isnah was also the head of the house of Isnah and he sat in council with the heads of the five houses. And so I retuned unto him and told him all the things that had happened to me in the great forest and my father wept for he knew that the Lord had come unto me and that I was favoured of the Lord. And pride entered in to my father’s heart and I said unto my father, I being only thirteen years of age I spoke to him saying “Your heart is full of pride and this is not of the Lord. For he has told me that if I do not take in to my heart the pride of the world I will receive all the things that he has promised me, for it is this pride that will bring down our people” Upon hearing me speak these words my mother was desirest that I be taken to the council chamber to stand before the Prophet. Now my father took me before the Prophet and I stood before him and I told him the many things that had happened to me in the great forest. The Prophet of the time was called Araneck after the great Prophet of the people that led them from the tower and he was the brother of my father and he had been a great Prophet and the people loved him and he sat and listened to the things - 83 - that had happened to me in the forest. After I had finished telling the Prophet all the things that had happened to me he steeped forward on to the great Urim and Thummim and he took me by the shoulders and he spoke these words “You have been blessed greatly by the Almighty, you have been blessed to be the Prophet of all the people. Remain faithful and all these things will come unto thee. For the Almighty has seen you and you have seen him and now you will be counted among those that have beheld his glory and seen his majesty” With this my father took me unto the holy rooms of the great temple and we were there for the space of five days worshiping and conducting ourselves in the covenant for the eternal safety of our souls. And we prayed and we conducted the covenant and we made ourselves one with the church and with the Lord of Heaven. Now my father was a great teacher and I shall never forget the words of wisdom that he spoke unto me while I was in my mid years. Now I grew through my mid years and in to my adult years and I was faithful and I did go unto the holy rooms of the temple many times and I was obedient unto all the commandments of the Almighty, and although I had times of incompletion I still did all the things that were commanded of me for one of my age. Now I was not alone in my mid years for I had many friends and companions and I had many times of great joy and excitement and we danced and sang together and we explored many places and we had many experiences. And it was while in my later mid years that I would meet the women who I would marry in the great temple and her name was Sheriniah. She was an Angel and a wonderful women and I fell in love with her with all my heart. Now we spent many times together and we prayed together and - 84 - worshiped together and sang and feasted together and it was the desire of our hearts that we be joined together in the holy temple and so I sent word to my father, for he was in the north lands with the Elders and the Priests teaching and giving comfort. For he had now become the Prophet of all the people. And word came from my father in the form of a letter and this is what he wrote. “My son how glad I was to hear of your impending sealing to Sheriniah. She is a good women and her family are a righteous family who will serve you well. My times in the north counties is soon at an end and although it has been a time that I shall never forget a larger part of the people have fallen in to error and they have fallen away form the teachings of the church and their God. Although we have spent many days teaching and bearing testimony unto them my heart is heavy because of the falseness that they have fallen in to. I say unto you my son that sin and wickedness only bring sadness and despair unto a person and that it brings darkness upon the whole land. For I have been told that this is not just a problem of the north but a problem for all the people, and when I think of the words of the old Prophets and my mind is turned to the things you saw in the vision the Lord gave you I fear for this people and for this land. We are journeying down a road that is not of God and I can not see an outcome that is at one with the laws of the Almighty. But my son I am glad in my heart that you have found someone with whom to spend eternity with, my spirit soars with the joy of a grateful father. God bless you my son.” My father was a great man. I would never see him again for when I received this letter my father had been killed by the worshipers of the God Odinon. - 85 - CHAPTER SIXTEEN The Beginning of the End Now it was because of the death of my beloved father that I was inspired to enter in to the holy sealing room to be married to Sheriniah. And we were sealed and married and we became bound together for all eternity as long as we remained faithful. I will never forget that day for it was one of great joy and a one of great sadness. But in that sadness I felt my father and I knew that what I had done pleased him. And I will never forget the felling of great joy when I looked in to the eyes of my beloved, for she was truly sent from the heavens. I have never felt as complete as I did at that time when she was in my life. And at the coming of the night we sang and danced and celebrated our unity together and many people came and blessed us and the feasting and dancing went on in to the morning. And I say again that I have never felt as complete as I did at that time when she was in my life. Now I had been called and anointed to be the Prophet of all the people and it was while I was in my middle years and it was while my heart was the happiest for I was married and my life was full. It was during this great time that I was anointed Prophet and I was set apart to do the will of the almighty. Now the people had been one people for hundreds of years and now they became a separate people again and there divisions became great. And their divisions were not only over doctrine but over wealth and money. The rich among our people became richer and the poor became poorer and the rich built great buildings unto themselves and the poor became nothing in - 86 - the sight of the people. And the division became great and the division was between the haves and the have-nots. And the division spread to the church and there became a division between those that held office in the church and those that did not and because of this there were established many other churches and many other religions and many of these religions prayed unto many different Gods. Now the order of Odinon was once again upon the land and it took hold of many of the people’s hearts and it was strong upon the land. The people who worshipped the God Odinon were few in number but it was the teachings of the worshipers of Odinon that did cause the most damage, for the teachings of Odinon did seep in to every aspect of life among my people. Now the law that had been established that said that any one who worshiped the God Odinon should be put to death had been forgotten and because of this the worship of this God was rife. So it was that Odinon became a God of convenience and he was looked upon as the first God among many of the people. But I say that many other people did worship other Gods, Gods for rain, Gods for the harvest, Gods for the horse and there were many that did worship after this manner. Now I say unto you that for me and my family we worshiped the Almighty and there were many others that also worshiped the Almighty. So it was that while I was in the seventh year of my reign as Prophet that I called together the heads of the five houses and I called together all those that still believed in the Almighty Lord and I called them together in the great council chamber. All those that believed in the Lord of Heaven gathered together and we gathered together in the council chamber of the great temple. For I was desirest that they should gather together to hear my - 87 - voice for the Lord had given to me a revelation to give to them and the Lord was desirest for them to hear his words. So it was that I stood before them and spoke with the power of prophesy and revelation and I spoke concerning our people and the coming of the Almighty in to the world. I record upon these plates the words that I spoke unto them “My friends and brothers you have been called to this great chamber by the decree of the Almighty. The Lord of Heaven came to me in a dream and gave unto me a mighty vision and it is his will that I share this mighty vision with you. I bear witness that the things that I saw in my vision made my heart both sad and joyful. I saw our land in ruins and many people heaped in great mounds of earth. I saw a people covering our land that were not of the almighty but were of our seed. I saw them cover the land as a great cloud of darkness and they sought to take the life of every soul that was upon the land weather a believer in the Almighty Lord or not. I saw many of our own people join with these invaders and betray their own loved ones to these Godless hordes. Amid these troubled scenes I beheld the great temple in which we now sit. I saw our beautiful and great temple and within its walls the last of the believers of our Lord. I saw many men marshalled in our ranks willing to defend the temple and our land, but I saw that their hearts were not turned to the Lord but to their own pride. Amid all this I saw that our people were driven to the temple and that because they would not soften their hearts they were wiped from this land. My heart sank and I knew that the prophesies that had been given by our Prophets of old had come to pass. That the unrighteous out numbered the believers of the Almighty and they had turned away from him with all their hearts. During this time of great pain I saw a man - 88 - and he had four sons and they journeyed with their wives into the desert and they were led to a land of great promise and this land was in the west and it was a protected land that the Lord had given to them and they grew in to a mighty nation, now the Lord told me that I was not to write or speak of what I had seen in full for this was to be given to another and when the time was given he would bring forth these things to the world and I was told that when they would be brought forth they would testify of him and his kingdom and that the same would be said of our people in a future time. This filled my heart with great joy to know that the Lord would preserve his law upon this earth. Now the Lord took me to a place that I had never seen before and I saw a Virgin and she was pure and unspotted and she was moved upon by the Holy Spirit and she gave birth to a baby boy and this baby was the Lord of Heaven and she gave birth to him in a stable built in to the rocks and she named him Jesus and many people came unto his bed side and they laid gifts at his feet and I saw Sharaneck that he laid Gold at his feet and many people came unto him and worshipped him for it was this Jesus that is the very Almighty that speaks to us and the very same Lord that we worship. And the lord spoke unto me and said “Behold my birth, for I will come in humble circumstances and I will bare witness of the Father and I will teach the Gospel unto all that will listen. Now look” and I looked and I saw that he was older and in his mid years and I saw that he was in a garden and I saw that he bled form his skin and the Lord said unto me “Behold I bleed for you and your people behold I bleed for all that have lived and will ever live. I bleed and take upon my self the sins of the entire world” and then I saw that the people spat on him and whipped him and they placed - 89 - thorns on his head and they nailed him to a tree in the form of a cross and there he died. And my heart sank that the people would do this. Now the Lord commanded me to look and I saw that he had risen from the dead and that he walked upon the earth once again and that he did many great things unto the people. And I saw that he did visit with many people who are not of our seed. Now when the Lord had shown me all these things he told me to tell all these things unto you and this is what I have done let the record bear witness that I have fulfilled what has been asked of me” Now when I had finished speaking unto the people gathered some of them took what I had said with a heavy heart and they left the council chamber and went away from the teachings of the Almighty for they could not believe that a God would come in the flesh in such circumstances and although this has been recorded by our Prophets of old and it is written in our holy texts they had forgotten until I spoke to them and they could not believe that he could be killed. Now as many as left stayed and they wondered at what I had told them and they praised the Lord whom they now called Jesus and they spoke unto me and they had many questions and I commanded them to go unto their homes and carry what they had heard in their hearts for a cloud was coming that would try their faith. Now it was while I was in my late mid years that the things that the Lord Jesus had told me started to become reality. Our land was invaded from the south by the people I had seen in my vision and they were the sons of Lioneck. Now they came from across the sea and there were a great many of them and they rode the horse and they thundered across our land and they started to cover - 90 - the whole land and make war upon our people. Now it was the desire of our people to make them welcome upon our land but the seed of Lioneck did not desire peace they desired war. They desired our homes and our women and our children and all that we possessed even our Gold and our Silver and our Zenion. And they desired that the Almighty God should be wiped from the memory of all the people. And a large portion of our people did go over to them and they joined themselves with the people of Lioneck. And so it was that the people of Lioneck took upon themselves the religion and beliefs of Odinon and they mixed these beliefs with those of their own. And a religion was formed from both beliefs and I say this that it is a cruel and bloodthirsty religion and my soul shudders to think of it. Now I was told by the Lord that I was to cry unto my people one last time to come back to the paths of righteousness. So I went forth with many of the followers of the one we called Jesus who was to be the Saviour of the world and we did cry unto the people. Now their hearts were hard and we could not persuade them to come over to the truth. And my heart was heavy and I was moved by the spirit to stop preaching unto the people. Now I say unto you who read this the record of my people that I laboured hard to bring my people to repentance but their hearts were hard and although I laboured among them they would not listen to my words. But I say this, that many times I wished I had been like unto the Lord of Heaven for then I would have been able to have pulled my people out of the eternal fire they were in. But I say unto you that this was a vain and prideful thing that my heart desired and I make it known unto you that these things are not of God but they are of our natural and carnal self. - 91 - So I now return to the record of my people. It was in those times of apostasy that the Lord spoke to me and commanded me to go unto the leader of the people. For at this time the people had separated themselves from the believers of the Almighty and they had elected a leader to lead them that was not called of God. Now I Jeraneck began to be in my adult years and my age was that of Seventy years and I went unto the leader of the people and I took with me the remaining people that had stayed true to the faith that our fathers had given unto us. Now I went unto the leader of the people and I entered into his place of business and I spoke with him and he spoke unto me saying. “My Name is Parosparus and I am the leader of the people. I know you Jeraneck, you are a Prophet but I tell you, you have no place here and you must leave for we have no desire to worship your God. We have no desire to worship any God not even the God of the people who have gone over to the seed of Lioneck. Now I command you to leave, for there is nothing about this people that you will find to change. And I have commanded that all the records of your religion be destroyed. So I say that if you will not leave this city or this land then I will have you destroyed” After hearing these words my heart grew heavy and I knew that it was to late for the people of this great and beautiful Island and although I was heavy of heart I spoke to Parosparus saying “Weather you believe in the Almighty Lord or not you will be wiped from of this land and you will be no more. For the seed of Lioneck do not care that you worship a God or not, for they desire your land and your fine clothing and your women for their own. I say these things not from my heart or because it pleases me to say them, but I say them because the Lord has commanded me to say them” Now when I had finished - 92 - speaking unto him I noticed that a change had come over him and I could feel that he felt the Spirit of the Lord in what I had said to him. Now he spoke to me saying “I may not follow your religion I may not believe in your God but I have felt the truth In the word you have spoken what shall we do” And I said unto him we must take up arms against these people we must defend our homes and we must defend ourselves against those that seek to murder our wives and our children and take away all that we have and bring us in to bondage” And Parosparus new the things that I had told him were true and he went forth unto the people and he commanded that a great army be established. Now there was need to establish an army because during the times when the people were living as one in peace there was no need for an army. And this was the reason that Parosparus called for an army to be established. I testify that this army was not like unto the great armies that had once fought in the great conflicts of our past for they did not have the skills, they did not have the armaments that the great armies of our past had had. I have read the records that concern the Second Great War and I have written them down and I say unto you that my heart cry’s unto the Almighty. Oh if only the people had had the skill that they had had. Oh if the people had had the leaders like unto Zinon. Oh if only the people had had the skill to fight a war. Oh if only my people had turned their hearts to the Almighty as our forefathers had done I might not be telling this sad tale. Now I make it known that my people did arm themselves and they did rally themselves in defence of their country and their land. But they did not do this in the name of their God but rather they did this unto themselves. Now the war that my people have been engaged in and - 93 - that has infested my country has been raging around us for the space of twelve years and it looks as if it might never end. Now because of the evilness of this war and the great destruction that is being done the last believes of the one true God have gathered themselves with me on the plains of Shainnon and to the great temple and we are joined with many who do not believe, for they think that they might be safe with the believers of the Almighty. But the Lord has made it known unto me that there is no escape for my people this time. For although there remain some that believe, we are in the minority and not the majority. And because of this the destruction has been great and all around us outside of the temple lay the remains of many buildings and many places of worship and the land is not recognizable unto me and great has been our down fall. The people have fled with me and even that Parosparus who rallied the people to fight. And now he keeps the holy temple as his place to prepare battle. And even his actions desecrate the temple. I have taken the holy council chamber unto myself and unto the believers who are with me and only we can enter its sanctuary. Now the leader of the seed of Lioneck who called himself Lioneck after the very first Lioneck who left his father Araneck in the wilderness was a descendent of the same Lioneck whom the three unworthy brothers went unto. He unlike Parosparus was a mighty man and he led his people with no other aim than to spill our blood and wipe us from the land. I Jeraneck being in my Seventy fifth year went unto him in secret and I went in to his tent and made myself known unto him and I spoke with him and I was desirest to here why he had come unto our land. And although he spoke to me and told me why he had - 94 - come unto our land I knew that the words which he spoke were not true and that his heart was filled with anger against my people. And I spoke unto him saying “Lioneck the great, why do you come unto our land and take it by force. Why do you not live in peace upon this land? For this land is promised to the seed of Araneck and all his children are welcome. Why can we not live upon this land in peace? Come unto our places of worship and do the things that we do within those places, and come unto the Almighty One of Heaven and take your rightful place in our society” with this Lioneck spoke to me words that I found hard to bear and I could not see why the Lord would permit a man like Lioneck to say such words and these are the words that he spoke “Your people have been unworthy they have not kept their first estate that the father has given them. You have not kept the laws, you have not kept the commandments which your own God has given unto you and because of this I was commanded in a dream to come unto your land and take it from you and to destroy your places of worship and your temples. But I was also told in my dream that if your people returned to the ways of the Lord and became as one that my people were to leave your land and if we would not then we would be slaughtered and destroyed. Now this is the reason that I come upon your land and take your land and take your women and kill your children and destroy your places of worship and this is the reason I tear down your great stone monuments and make them unsteady. And I do these things because your people are not one and they will not unite as one people. And until they do this the slaughter will continue” After I had heard these words I grew heavy in heart because I knew that the words that he spoke were true and - 95 - I knew the Almighty Lord had sent Lioneck and his people on to our land because we would not repent and return to the paths of righteousness. Lioneck the great did not keep me prisoner but allowed me to return unto my people. I retuned to the great temple and I went unto the holy room of the temple and I cried unto the Almighty and while I was crying unto him for the sake of my people the Spirit came upon me and it bore witness to me that the Almighty would stretch forth his hand in an instant and save us but the people would not listen and they would not return to him and because of this he is bound by the almighty law to fulfil that which he had revealed to his many Prophets concerning the destruction of my people. For the people had been warned that if they left the paths of righteousness they would be wiped form off this sacred land. For the people covenanted with the Almighty that they would remain righteous and there children’s children would remain righteous but there children’s children have not done what was covenanted and it is they who have brought this upon our people not the Almighty. And the Spirit bore testimony of these things to me and I knew from that time on that I would be the last Prophet of my people. CHAPTER SEVENTEEN - 96 - The Record is Complete I finish the record of my people for I am the last great Prophet of my people. My people are dead and their bodies are decaying upon the ground and I have seen them laying on the ground and my heart is filled with great sadness and it is heavy for the loss of the people. For I and a few of the believers of Christ are camped with the walls of the great temple on the plains of Shainnon and although our temple is guarded by watch towers the watch towers are weak and the men that guard them are weak. For outside these mighty walls are the armies of the seed of Lioneck and they grow hungry for our blood and they grow hungry for our destruction. I Jeraneck know these things are to come to pass for I have seen them in a vision and I have witnessed them. And I have told the people all the days of my life to repent and come unto the Christ, the Almighty One, The Lord of Heaven. And I have seen his birth and I have seen the power and glory of the Almighty and he shall come in glory and he shall walk among the children of men. But now my people shall not see the Almighty, The Lord of Heaven, the Christ, they will not see him walk among the children of men for they have grown wicked, they have lost the right to see him walk the earth. Now I and fifty of the followers of the Almighty One of Heaven have gathered ourselves within the walls of the temple. Parosparus lies dead, the armies of the people are scattered and many of our people have gone over and joined themselves with the people of Lioneck and they do worship that awful image that they call a God, - 97 - the God that sparked the Second Great War among my people. They worship Odinon and with the worship of this abomination come the things of the evil one, the sacrifice of children, the defiling of women, and all manner of evil. And they are evil, they are blood thirsty and they intend to wipe us from the face of our land that was given to us by the Almighty. As I write these things my mind is turned to the Prophets of the past, and my mind is turned to the many great things that they did for the people, their great deeds and works and their wonderful sermons and their preaching’s unto the people. And I have thought to my self these many days past while I have been camped in the great council chamber with the remainder of the people of light, what was the need for these sermons and preaching’s. For if the people were never going to repent and come unto the Almighty One, The Lord of Heaven, the Christ in great numbers what was the need for these teachings and preaching’s and sermons by the Prophets of old. And I confess unto you the servants of God in the last days of the world that I have had doubt in my mind and in my heart. For as I have written upon these plates the history of my people I have seen many great and wonderful things. I have recorded many great and wonderful things but a larger part of our history is filled with terror, violence, murder and bloodshed. And only a small part of our history is filled with the people of the Almighty and there love for him. Because of these things I doubted and the seed of doubt was planted by the evil one and during my time of doubt and despair an Angel of light sent from the presence of the Almighty One of Heaven came unto me and he promised me that these records would not fall in to the hands of evil men but that - 98 - they would be given to a servant of the Almighty in the last days of the world. And he has shown unto me your face and the faces of your servants and I beheld that you were delightsome and that you will read the history of my people and record it. And I was promised that in the last hours of my people in the last moments of our existence the Saviour, the Almighty, the Lord of Heaven would come unto me and take the records unto heaven and he would keep them until the time when my son Rayanack shall be given charge over them. For my son Rayanack will not taste death and it shall be he as I have previously recorded who shall keep the records of this people until he be commanded to take them and deliver them unto the servant of the Lord in the last days. This filled my heart with great joy and I turned my mind again to these records. I Jeraneck write these things so that you will know that I am a man and I have failings and I have doubts and I have fears. For I am afraid in my body for what they shall do to me and my people when they come into this sacred temple and find us. I have been upon the watch towers I have seen the destruction and the death that covers the whole land. I have heard the cries of the children and the mothers and the fathers. I have heard them beg for their lives. I have heard them cry for mercy. And I have cried and I have wept for this land is now desolate and all our great buildings are gone. All our places of worship have been town down or defiled. To the south to the north to the east and to the west and to the islands of the sea in the north countries there is none but evil and there is nothing but bloodshed. Gone are the days of singing and dancing. Gone are the days when we would all gather to celebrate the birth of a child or the sealing of a man and women. - 99 - The only followers of Christ are here with me save my son and the great prophet Sharaneck who wonders the earth preaching to all who will listen. As I lay down upon these plates the final details of my people I tell you of the great battle only three days ago, were the final remnants of our armies gathered together outside of the walls of the temple. And they gathered together on the plains of Shainnon and the temple is the only building left standing of any beauty and the armies were gathered. And they were gathered on horse back and they had shield and spear and the children were gathered with the army and they were arrayed in battle armour and the women also. And many of the followers of Christ did stand with them to do battle. And so it was that Parosparus led them and he being old and worn down with war led them as well as he could. And he led them forth. But this was not like unto previous battles for this was not done in Gods name and no words were spoken to rally the army in the name of the Almighty. But rather they marched forward as if they knew that this would be their last time in battle. And they rode forth and marched forth and the ground shook and a mighty cloud of snow went up in to the air, but this was not from my people but from the hordes of the seed of Lioneck for there numbers are great and there numbers are great because of the many people that have gone over to them. And I stood upon the watch tower and I witnessed the destruction of my people and the great bloodshed and I saw that the snow upon the ground turn red with their blood. But I can not record the feeling that filled my heart for they are so great that I find it difficult to write them and I knew then as I know now that our civilization was finished, that our great and glorious people were no more. I waited until the darkness - 100 - fell and I left the watch tower and I made my way out of the walled temple and I was accompanied by two guards and they took me to the edge of the trench that surrounds the mighty temple and I looked over the great plains and valley and I saw by way of moonlight dead heaped upon dead and I beheld that the ground under foot was soaked with blood and I saw that it took many falls of snow to cover the blood. So I stood there with these records under my arm and I wept and I wept for the space of many hours for my people were no more. I tell you these things not for you to be sad for my people for they knew the things that they were to do. But I tell you these things so that you may recognise that when a people fall away they fall a way for ever not for a little but for all time and I tell you these things so that you may take heed. I have returned to the great chamber of this wonderful and beautiful building and it is here that I sit until the end writing my last testament. And it is to you that I write and to the followers of the Almighty God of Heaven in your day. For in your day you will have many great and terrible wars, and in your day you will be cast out and vilified and persecuted and your name will be had for both good and evil and there will be many people that hate you and wish to do you and the other followers of the Almighty that are joined with you harm. But I say unto you take courage for the Lord Almighty is with you. Now I fill the last remaining space on these plates with my own testament and my belief. And I fill the remaining space with my felling towards the Almighty, the Holy one, the Lord of Heaven, the Christ. I am Jeraneck son of Isnah form the house of Isnah and I am proud to - 101 - have been called a Prophet and follower of the Almighty God. I am proud that I knew him, I am proud that I spoke with him. I am proud that I married in his great and wonderful temple and that I did it in his name and that I was joined to my beautiful wife in his name. Although my wife may have been taken from me by the evil that sweeps my land, and although the loss of my beloved has left a great hole within my heart her memory abides with me and it is thanks to the Almighty and his eternal plan that I may see my wife again in the life to come. I bear testimony of the greatness of the Almighty God and I bear witness to you that he is the creator. That he is the Son and he does the will of the Father. I bear testimony that he will come and he will be born just as I was born and he will come to free all men from the bondage that they are in. I bear testimony that I have seen him and I have walked and talked with him. He is the promised one who will come to redeem all men. I testify that after his first coming he will come again in your day and the earth will be shaken to its very foundations and he will come in majesty and glory and he will rule over all the earth. I bear testimony that I was born to a great people that I saw them for what they truly are, the followers of the Almighty God the People of Light. I am grateful and thankful to the God of Heaven that I was born to this people that I am counted amongst this great seed, for I love them. I testify that this land is a blessed land that it was given to my people by the Almighty, because this land is great and all who dwell upon her are led here by the God of Heaven even the people now upon our land wreaking havoc were led here by the God above. I bear witness that this land is a choice land and that it is a special land a land of light for the followers of light. - 102 - I can not speak for all the people that inhabit this land but I can speak for the fifty remaining children of the almighty, the children of light. And the fifty that are with me are a mixture of children, women, elders and priests and they are my friends. They are my brothers and my sisters, they are my kindred, they are my people, and they are the People of Light. For I bear witness that the People of Light are the followers of the God of Heaven. The People of Light are called this because we follow the gospel of the Almighty God for it is a gospel of light. The People of Light are the chosen people and all who follow the teachings of the Almighty God, the Lord of Heaven, the Saviour, the Holy child are The People of Light. As you read the words of this record, a record of the history of my people you will feel us, see us and the spirit will testify just as he has with me that all these things are true. For I see you, I feel you, I know of your day. Soon you will know of my time and my people and this record, for I have seen it come forth unto you and it will speak to you and it will touch your very soul. I am the last great Prophet of my people. I am the last Prophet to sit in this great council chamber. I am the last Prophet to sit in the great prophetic seat. I am the last Prophet of my people to utter his testimony of the Almighty Lord the God of Heaven. For I say unto all who read this record to pray unto that Almighty Lord of Heaven and ask him if these things are true for no mans hand can bear witness of the truth only that of the spirit and the spirit of revelation. And he will send unto you these gifts, the gift of the spirit and of revelation and it is those gifts that will witness unto you that these things are true. And if you ask with a full heart and real purpose he - 103 - will indeed answer your prayer and reveal unto you the truth of this record. As I sit here the watch towers are empty and we are alone. We are at the mercy of the hordes that gather out side our walls. And even now as I bear this testament unto you I can hear their voices and I can hear their blood cry and I do tremble with great fear. But I take courage in the fact that I know that by the time this day is out I will be with my Lord and I will be with the Almighty. Now I finish the record of the history of my people and I finish my testament and I have laid it out upon these twenty four plates and they are fashioned by my hand, and I have also compiled a record of the religious laws and practices of my people so that you may know more fully how to worship the Almighty and they are to be one record. Now I make an end of this record and I say unto you I have lived a life that I am proud of and would live again. I have lived a life in service unto my people and to my God. Now I take up the sword in defence of the fifty who remain with me and I know that I will not live to see another dawn, nor will any that are within these walls. And this holy place will be taken down and it will be defiled and made a ruin. When you look upon the temple that remains remember me, remember my people for we are The People of Light. And now it comes to this, the end of these records the end of my life, the end of our great and glorious civilisation, and the end of my people upon this great, sacred, beautiful and blessed land. For green are its hills and pleasant are its valleys and clear are its waters and its beauty is endless. But now the darkness falls and it shall not be lifted for many years. - 104 - And this testimony I bear as the last great Prophet of my people. I do it in the name of the Almighty the Glorious one of Heaven. For this is our history the history of The People of Light. Amen THE Records OF THE RELIGIOUS PRACTICES OF - 105 - THE PEOPLE OF LIGHT What follows are the records of the religious practices and ceremonies from the people of light. These religious records are recorded in the language of the people of the north, the people of Ridnon. The people of Ridnon are the keepers of the religious records among the people of light. The eye of God is upon the Urim and the Thummim it is to be used within the holy temple or tabernacle of your people just as it is done in our temples or tabernacles. The ceremony of the holy temple is to be presided over by the presiding High priest or Elder. This record bears witness of our religion and our dealings with God and all the things pertaining to the ordinances and ceremonies done in the name of God in his holy house. These records are kept by the Elders and High Priests in the temples of the Almighty God. They are kept by the people and written by the hand of the people of Ridnon. Within the holy temples and within the holy tabernacles of the Almighty God a work is done that is above all other work to be done by the church of God. This work allows men to dwell with and become one with God. These ordinances and these ceremonies are sacred and holy and must not be repeated or given to anyone that is not joined with the Almighty God within the holy temple or tabernacle of the people. - 106 - Now all these ceremonies and ordinances must be recorded by one who is called to be the presiding Elder or High Priest over the whole church of God. It is the will of God that we the people of Ridnon are called to be the record keepers of all things sacred and of all things that are done with in the temple of the Almighty God. We do this so that our people may know of the things of God and we do this for the future generations and their worship of the Almighty. The ordinances or ceremonies that must be conducted within the holy walls of the temple or tabernacle are these. The ordinance of Baptism must first be conducted with the walls of the temple and it must be done in this manner. First the person being clean and pure before God goes down in to the water. Then an Elder or Priest takes hold of them and after saying these words. “In the name of the Almighty God I baptise you in the name of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit”. The Elder or Priest then takes the person down under the water so that not a hair on their head is above the water. Then and only then are they baptised in the name of the Almighty God. The second is the sacred ordinance of Marriage for the eternal world. A man and a women are to come before the Prophet of the Almighty and give themselves to the Almighty and then to each other. They are to kneel across the alter that has been sanctified by the all powerful priesthood of the Almighty God and they must be bound together. This can only be done by the Prophet of the whole church of God and in the holy temple or tabernacle. These are the words that must be spoken when they kneel over the alter, across from one another on the Urim and the Thummim. The male must say these words - 107 - in this order. “I, son of God, son of Adam pledge my eternal life to my partner. I will honour her just as I honour God”. These words are to be spoken by the women “I, daughter of God, daughter of Eve, pledge my eternal life to my partner. I will honour him just as I honour God” These words must be spoken only in the holy temple or tabernacle of the Almighty God. Now they must say together these words. “We pledge our lives and our souls to God and we pledge that we both man and women both son and daughter of Adam and Eve be united together in holiness and obedience to God. We covenant to offer ourselves to none other save it be our married partner, so that we may be together for ever under God as long as we are obedient” Now this must be done in this order, and with this they are sealed forever within the holy ordinance of marriage The third is that a man may become as God. And this gift is given to us by the Almighty God by our Prophets and from our holy Prophets they have given us instruction that we men and women may become as God and may be one with God and it is done in this manner in the holy temple or tabernacle of the Almighty. A man must come unto the Lord with his wife or if he has no wife then he is to come unto the Lord with a full heart having no lust within him. Once they have come unto the Lord and they are stood on the holy Urim and Thummim they must pledge their lives to God saying these words. “We covenant with God the Almighty to give our lives and our souls to the service of God. That we may give unto God our lives that we may best serve him” Now these are the words that must be spoken when the men of the Almighty God come unto him and make themselves one with God in the holy temple. “I son of God son of Adam come unto - 108 - God in this temple and I pledge my life, my soul and my possessions and all that I have unto him so that I may return to live with him in his holy kingdom” The words of the women are this. “I daughter of God. Daughter of Eve come unto God in this holy temple and pledge to him my life, my soul and my possessions and I also covenant with God to give to his worship the seed of my womb. I pledge myself to my husband that we enter in to his holy kingdom” These words must be said in this order so that a man and women may enter in to the holy temple of the Lord upon death. Now they must be done in this order. When they are done in this order the children of God from that time forward are at one with him. These are the ordinances and ceremonies that must be done within our temples and tabernacles and they must be done in this order. It must be that a man comes before God then a woman, and then they are joined together with God for eternity. And no body but the presiding Elder of the church or the temple can officiate over these ceremonies for it is he that will marry them and him that will lead them to become one with God. Now I Jeraneck record in the language of the people of Ridnon for those who shall receive this record in the last days. That a man is like unto the Father and he is like unto the Father for he lives. And a woman is like unto the Mother for she bares fruit upon the land. That all who come within the walls of the holy temple or tabernacle may know that it is through man and women that our seed and our children go forward. It is by the holy Urim and - 109 - Thummim that all things are done. And all people coming unto the holy temple of God must stand upon the Urim and Thummim and give themselves to the Lord, the Holy One of Heaven the Almighty for all time even for eternity. They must be obedient and serve him. It is told to us by God that all men and women must come to the Lord in holiness and righteousness. No man and no women can come before the Lord unless they stand upon the Urim and the Thummim and pledge themselves to him. And it is by the order of Ridnon and their religious practices that my people have gained a further knowledge of all the religious practices and ceremonies that must be done within the temple and unto the Lord. And it is because of them that I write in their language upon these plates because they were the keepers of the holy and religious records. Now all that must be done within the walls of the holy temple have been written. It is expedient that a man come before God in righteousness and a women comes before God clean and in righteousness and that they be joined together for eternity and that they pledge themselves to God and they must do this upon the holy Urim and Thummim for the Urim and Thummim are representations of revelation and prophesy. With these two powers within the temple man my gain revelation and women my gain prophesy and they may work in unity one with another to bring about the greater glory of God and that is that a women may have children and that a man may have authority over her. Prophesy and revelation are one in unity for they are the Urim and the Thummim. Now I write upon these plates that contain the religious practices and ceremonies of my people to you of the last days before the second coming of the Almighty - 110 - God. And I write to you and say unto you that your religious practices must be done in all manner of righteousness as we have done ours and I give unto you these commandments. Behold them and practise them for they are from the Almighty God and they shall not be held in disregard by any one. They are thus. 1. Be righteous and obedient and clean 2. Be holy and sanctified 3. Be baptised in his name 4. Bring your self to the holy temple to become one and be cleansed before the Almighty 5. You are to come in to the holy temple and be married to your husband or wife and become one, just as the Son and the Father have done. 6. Follow the teachings of the Almighty. Weather they be written upon plates off metal, weather written upon Zerith, weather written upon Amarith, weather written upon paper. 7. Meet together often so that you may feel of the blessings of the Lord with others of like mind. Now take heed and read with a righteous heart the following things that I have written upon these plates because they are sacred and they are holy. For the time will come when my people are no more as I have recorded in the historical record of my people. Now I make it known upon these records the religious record of the people for you must also do the things that the people of Ridnon and my people have done within the temple. Pray unto the Father all the days of they life, do this and you will never go hungry and you will never know want. Do not these things and your people will wonder in - 111 - darkness for ever and ever. Pray this prayer ever morning when you awake form your sleep, stand and say these words. “Oh Lord my God I come before thee in holiness and I come before thee as a pure son/daughter. Bless me oh Lord and keep my days upon this land long” do this all the days of they life and it is promised that you will be blessed. We are one people unto God and we are one people in the temple or tabernacle. Remember when we enter the temple we stop being one unto our self and we become one with God and it is this that will help us see the signs of the Almighty. Remember that the signs in the heavens show us the way and the signs on the earth show us the times and the signs in the temple or holy tabernacle show us the signs of the Father and the Son. Now the earth is one rotation and the stars are many and the heaves are numbered in the eternal round and they turn upon the days of the earth and many Gods are there that command the heavens and unless we do the things which our Lord has commanded our days are numbered upon this earth and we will be wiped form the face of the earth. A warning I give unto you and your people that unless you come unto God and do the things which you have been commanded you too will be taken form the promise and it will be given unto another. You are to take upon yourselves the name of the Almighty and you are to become as children. Humble yourselves before God. For it is with your hearts that you will know when you have become like a child and are ready to become one with the God of Heaven. - 112 - I give unto you commandments from the holy mouth of the Almighty follow their precepts and think always upon the Lord. Now look to these and apply them to your life and upon the word of the Almighty God your life will prove to be an example to others. 1. My son, think upon virtue and do not turn your thoughts to sin, for man lives eternally and the things of the spirit are more greatly to be desired. Put out of your mind what is past and do not fret and worry about what has not yet come to pass. 2. Put not your trust and confidence in kings and princes but in the Lord your God. 3. Do not do unto others what would not be good for you. Be single-minded among rulers and friends. 4. Do not deliver yourself up as a slave to any man. Stay far away from any man who approaches you in anger or in enmity. 5. Do not mock anyone. 6. Be plain in your speech. 7. As you fear Hell, punish others only after due reflection. 8. Honour your Father and Mother, listen to them and obey them. 9. Strive to be firmly anchored in your Religion 10. Do not rely on property and the goods of this world, for property and the goods of this world are like a bird that flies from one tree to another and stays on none Now the days upon this land of my people are numbered and I complete this religious record with a warning to you that the time will come when the lord will - 113 - call you forth from out of the world and he will call you forth and you must come and you must answer the calling and he will show you the way. And unto your Prophet I give the commandments of the ages and unto him I give the keys of the kingdom for it is through him that all these things are made known. For the Lord will speak unto his servants and his servants will speak unto his servants. I say unto you that you will take your journey northward in to the land of the people of Ridnon for the Lord has shown unto me the great journey that you will take and it will be done in a time of darkness and a time of peril and a time of wickedness. You will go to the north countries where a remnant of the people of Ridnon dwell and you will take upon yourself all the teachings of the people of Ridnon and there great library’s will be opened unto you and you will see for yourself all the great religious ceremonies played out before you and you will bear record of all the things that you see. Take your journey unto the lands northward unto the people of Ridnon. And the Lord will give unto you an instrument like unto that of my people and it will guide you and it will point the way north by which you should travel. And it is promised by the Almighty that this instrument will guide you and show you the way unto the lands of the people of Ridnon. For it must needs be that you be faithful and you must do the things which the Lord has commanded or this great blessing that has been promised to you and your seed will be taken from you and you and your people will be left alone without the light of the almighty to guide you. Now I make these things known unto you so you will know that the Lord the Almighty is with me and I record them in his name and in his name alone. I say to you the servants of the Almighty in the last times of the world, that - 114 - the times in which I have seen you live are wicked and they offend the Almighty and because of this the air will become dirty with a sickness and this will lead to many deaths and a great famine will rise up and the famine will be strong and the dirty sickness from the air in the form of a bird will take many unto heaven and the people will cry and curse God. Now if you are faithful you will avoid all these things but if you sell yourself to the world your will perish and die. Now although my words are strong, they are the words of the Almighty and they are recorded for your sake and the sake of your people. Behold I have given to your people a part of the religious records of the people of Ridnon and I have fulfilled that which has been given me and I do it with a full heart. Now I say these things in the name of the Holy One of Heaven and the Holy One of Earth the Almighty God for he is our God just as he is yours. So let it be done that this record I seal up and these records I give unto God so that they may come forth in your day through the seed of my loins and I close in the name of the Lord Almighty even the very Christ that is to come. Amen. - 115 - 
