
A Review and Critique of 
The Jewish Gospels by Daniel Boyarin 
Daniel Boyarin tackles three of the most controversial topics that seemingly divide 
Christianity and Judaism. Often based on the “Son of Man” concept, he argues that a divine, 
suffering Messiah constituted one part of mainstream, first-century, Jewish expectation. It 
took centuries for both Christianity and Judaism to make these issues into arbitrary 
distinctions between two religions. I maintain that Boyarin’s “Son of Man” connection does 
not rest on persuasive evidence. But even if he at times may make a mountain out of a 
molehill, Boyarin’s overall thesis still stands. 
Analysis 
Main Thesis 
Boyarin’s central point is that the Gospels are Jewish and were a legitimate part of the 
Judaism of their time. They did not depart from the first-century Jewish fold either in their 
high Christology or their view of Torah practice. 
The concepts of a divine, as well as suffering Messiah were part and parcel of Jewish 
expectation in the first century, not constructed by Christianity after the fact to explain the 
phenomenon of Jesus, as scholars often postulate.1
 While he does not deprive the Jesus 
movement of all creativity, he seeks to demonstrate that it was not so much a question of 
whether the Messiah would be divine, or whether he would suffer, but whether Jesus of 
Nazareth was legitimately the one to fill that role. 
Gentile ideas were not incorporated into a Jewish story after the fact. Both 
Christianity and Judaism later misconstrued thoroughly Jewish ideas in the Gospels to be 
non-Jewish for sociohistorical reasons. Boyarin cites a letter from Jerome to Augustine to 
demonstrate that centuries after the Jewish Gospels, Christian, as well as Jewish leaders, were 
still fighting against the concept of Synagogue Jews who followed Jesus and that such an idea 
was anathema to emerging orthodoxy within Judaism and Christianity.2
 
As a hiatus in his Christological arguments, Boyarin switches sides to tackle Christian 
interpretations of kashrut in Mark 7. Here, he supports his thesis by removing the 
misconception that the Gospels departed from either kashrut or the larger family of Judaism. 
While not unique, his contribution helps solidify a completely Jewish view of the Gospels. 2
A Divine Messiah 
Both Boyarin’s general argument regarding halachic practice in Mark 7, as well as 
Jewish expectations of a suffering Messiah, are not unique to him and have been maintained 
by Messianic Judaism for well over a century, e.g. by Rabbi Yechiel Lichtenstein (1831–
1912), professor of rabbinics at the famed Institutum Judaicum Delitzschianum.3
 Boyarin 
even admits this Messianic Jewish connection when addressing the suffering Messiah motif.4
On these points, Boyarin is not unique, or even as nuanced as some Messianic Jewish 
scholars.5
 It is the fact that he is Taubman Professor of Talmudic Culture and rhetoric at UC 
Berkeley which finally gave these interpretations notoriety. Where Boyarin makes his 
greatest contribution is by arguing for a high Christology within first-century Judaism. 
He begins by reversing the traditional Christian roles of the terms “Son of God” and 
“Son of Man,” by showing that in the Hebrew Bible (Ps. 2:2, 6–7; Ps 110; 2 Sam 7:14), “Son 
of God” is a specific descriptor of the human Son of David. He is correct in linking this 
definition to the Gospels, but it is an oversimplification. Boyarin must confine himself to the 
Gospel of Mark, since he knows that other Gospels and apostolic texts take the terminology 
of the “Son” to another level of relationship with the “Father.” This focus on Mark becomes a 
tedious tendency as Boyarin too often rests his case on Markan priority,6
 and almost solely 
makes use of Mark, while arguing for the Jewish Gospels in plural. 
Next, Boyarin claims that, though not universal or uncontested in first-century Jewish 
thought, the term “Son of Man” was as established as common currency. The term 
represented a heavenly, divine redeemer, enthroned next to the Ancient of Days. This idea 
was primarily built on Daniel 7, which in turn inspired other texts like 1 Enoch and 4 Ezra, a 
tradition also attested by the rabbis in b.Hagiga 14a. 
He does a fine job of linking these texts with the Christology of the Gospels and, in so 
doing, establishing that the tradition of an exalted Messiah—coming with the clouds, seated 
at the right hand of God—was a known, Jewish expectation. This tradition was independent 
of, though central to the Gospels. Exactly how Jews interpreted this concept through the lens 3
of monotheism is not as clear. Boyarin is quick to apply the “divine” descriptor to the Son of 
Man, though he suggests it is more functional than ontological.7
 His greatest support is surely 
that outside Daniel 7, only God is depicted as riding on the clouds some seventy times in the 
Hebrew Bible.8
 
Boyarin’s speculations regarding the source of the Daniel 7 tradition are less 
compelling and are, ultimately, immaterial to his case. He posits that the theophany in Daniel 
7 contains remnants of ancient Israelite syncretism with Canaanite worship of ’El and Ba’al. 
His case falls apart when he argues that the redactor of Daniel included this ancient, 
syncretistic tradition while at the same time “labored” to do everything he could to suppress 
it.9
 In that case, why would the author not simply have suppressed it? 
The Son of Man Problem 
To my mind, Boyarin successfully links the figure of Daniel 7 and his extra-biblical 
evidence to Jewish Gospel Christology. However, he goes further and contends that every 
mention in the Gospels to the Son of Man is a reference to this messianic tradition. We 
simply do not seem to have enough textual evidence to prove this link. 
Boyarin acknowledges that rivers of ink have been spilt on the Son of Man Problem 
for generations, but he takes the old position that it must have been a fixed title in first-
century Judaism. Larry Hurtado, who is a world-leading scholar on early Christology, points 
out that, as far as the evidence goes, 4 Ezra does not contain the term. English translations of 
the Ethiopian 1 Enoch render some texts as “son of man,” though this is a misleading 
translation, and the DSS fragments of 1 Enoch do not provide us with the definite son of man. 
Hurtado sums up the consensus of most of today’s major NT scholars: 
“The expression, “The Son of Man,” is not attested in Second Temple Jewish 
tradition—at all, period. The figure of Daniel 7, the “one like a son of man,” is known 
and does appear to have been influential in some Second Temple Jewish tradition, but 
he is not called, “The Son of Man.”10
The irony is that the Son of Man link is not necessary for Boyarin to prove his 
Christological thesis. The crucial Gospel texts already allude to the Daniel 7 figure without 
needing the Son of Man. A similar case can be made for the theology of 1 Enoch and 4 Ezra. 4
Boyarin’s insistence on the Son of Man terminology even leads him to self-contradictory 
interpretations of Jesus’ approach to halachah. Whereas he successfully rescues Jesus from 
abrogating chunks of Torah in Mark 7, he gingerly suggests that in the Sabbath controversy 
of Mark 2, Jesus abrogated Sabbath halachah because, as the divine Son of Man, he could 
essentially do as he pleased.11 This is clearly an unnecessary interpretation of the text’s 
halachic logic. More importantly, it is precisely the type of interpretation he argues against in 
Mark 7—all because Jesus mentions that the “Son of Man” (perhaps mankind) is master of
(or takes precedence over) the Sabbath.12
A Kosher Messiah 
The middle of The Jewish Gospels is devoted whether Jesus did or did not abrogate 
the kosher laws in Mark 7. This gives the book an evenhanded appeal since this topic is more 
controversial in Christian theology, while the rest of the book may be difficult for some 
Jewish readers. 
Boyarin points out that the consensus that Jesus abrogated kashrut in Mark 7 is nearly 
universal among both pious and secular scholars alike. This interpretation is indeed surprising 
as it makes Jesus castigate the Pharisees for abolishing God’s laws (Mark 7:13) while he 
himself would rip out several chapters (7:19). It is less surprising when one realizes that the 
halachic nuances of the text would be lost on nearly anyone but a practicing, Talmudic Jew. 
Though he does not add much in the way of new insights to Messianic Jewish 
scholarship, Boyarin does a superb job of explaining the difference between the kashrut 
system and the ritual purity system. While some of the terms cross over, the context of Mark 
7 is clearly a halachic argument about ritual purity, not permissible food, and Jesus only uses 
the context to give a moral parable. 
I contend that Boyarin overstates his case by drawing too general and harsh a contrast 
between Judean Pharisees and Galilean Jews (like Jesus and his followers).13 (a) The Gospels 
attest to Pharisees also living in the Galilee. (b) Only some of Jesus’ disciples did not wash
their hands, and Jesus himself is not attacked. (c) The Lukan tradition also tells us that 
several Pharisees became disciples of Jesus without necessarily changing their overall 
practice, e.g. Paul (cf. Acts 15:5; 23:6). (d) Boyarin’s view does not consider the amount of 5
Pharisaic tradition practiced by Jesus and his followers. 
I agree with Mark Kinzer that Jesus’ controversies with the Pharisees stem more from 
what Peter Tomson has called “polemic affinity” than essential difference, i.e. Jesus was 
intimately close to the Pharisees in life and thought and therefore more heated discussions 
over minutia ensued.14 It makes more sense to view Mark 7 as an internal proto-rabbinic 
debate. Later rabbis agree with Jesus’ halachic opinion that once ritually impure food is 
eaten, it loses its ritual status.15 This is exactly Boyarin’s rationale when it comes to Jesus 
halachic criticism of korban vows (Mark 7:10–13). 
“The later Rabbis, at least from the second century on, developed a method for 
invalidating such a vow, which indeed goes against the Torah. It is hard to assess the 
historical validity of the Markan Jesus’ claim against the Pharisees, but it cannot be 
denied that it might very well have been the case, especially given his accuracy in 
other matters of Jewish, and especially pharisaic, practices.”
16
Applying the same approach more evenly to the rest of Mark 7 would place Jesus in 
much closer proximity to the Pharisees than Boyarin does. 
A Suffering Messiah
The book finishes with making the case that the motif of a suffering Messiah in Isaiah 
53 was more the rule rather than the exception in Jewish interpretive history. This does not 
add to our knowledge of historical situation, but Boyarin goes further and tries to link this 
tradition to the Son of Man in Daniel. He relies, however, on the convoluted theory 
(mentioned above) that the redactor of Daniel was obfuscating the text when combining two 
conflicting traditions. There is no need for this strained, hypothetical argument to establish a 
first-century expectation for a suffering Messiah. 
Summary 
Daniel Boyarin bravely discusses three of the most controversial topics that divide 
Christianity and Judaism today. His academic contribution has persuasively shown that the 
Gospels, including their Christology, are Jewish and were a legitimate part of the Judaism of 
their time. Distinctions between Judaism and Christianity are therefore late and did not apply 
at the time. I have demonstrated that Boyarin’s central argument of the Son of Man Problem 
is unsubstantiated by the evidence, but that his overall thesis still stands.
