Edward Feser has recently defended five arguments for the existence of the 
God of (Thomistic) classical theism, each of which is divided into two stages. 
Stage one concludes to a being which, in stage two, is argued to have an ap-
propriate range of classical divine attributes.
Feser’s second argument—the Neo-Platonic proof—reasons from com-
posite beings to the existence an absolutely simple being. The general line of 
argument traces back to the fifth of Plotinus’s Enneads, but it also enjoys a 
family resemblance with other contemporary arguments.1
 The primary focus 
of this paper is stage one of this argument. Formally, it proceeds:1. The things of our experience are composite.
2. A composite exists at any moment only insofar as its parts are 
combined at that moment.
3. This composition of parts requires a concurrent cause.
4. So, any composite has a cause of its existence at any moment at which 
it exists.
5. So, each of the things of our experience has a cause at any moment at 
which it exists.
6. If the cause of a composite thing’s existence at any moment is itself 
composite, then it will in turn require a cause of its own existence at 
that moment.
7. The regress of causes this entails is hierarchical in nature, and such a 
regress must have a first member.
8. Only something absolutely simple or noncomposite could be the first 
member of such a series.
9. So, the existence of each of the things of our experience presupposes 
an absolutely simple or noncomposite cause.2
In simpler terms, whatever has parts requires a concurrent, sustaining ef-
ficient cause; chains of concurrent, sustaining efficient causation—because 
they are ordered hierarchically (or per se3
)—cannot descend infinitely; 
hence, there exists an utterly non-composite first cause of the existence of 
composite thingsMy aim in this paper is to critically appraise this Neo-Platonic argument. 
I first discuss some necessary preliminaries in §2. Next, I argue in §3 that the 
argument fails to establish the God of classical theism insofar as premise (3) 
is appropriately regarded as unmotivated by detractors of classical theism. I 
also address Feser’s inference to the mindedness of the absolutely simple being. 
Finally, I argue in §4 that the argument is inimical to Trinitarianism on two 
fronts. While the criticisms leveled in §4 do not constitute direct challenges to 
the Neo-Platonic proof, they are significant insofar as they establish (if success-
ful) tension between the Neo-Platonic proof and a core tenet of Christianity.
Before turning to the preliminaries, it’s worth dwelling briefly on the sig-
nificance and situatedness of this paper. There exists (as yet) no scholarly 
evaluation of Feser’s Neo-Platonic proof in the literature.5
 This dearth is sur-
prising given the importance to classical theism of reasoning from composite 
being to non-composite being.
II. PRELIMINARIES
Before tackling my criticisms of the Neo-Platonic proof, clarity on several 
background concepts is necessary. 
The first of these is classical theism. Classical theism—along with affirm-
ing God’s essential moral perfection, omniscience, omnipotence, intelligence, 
and so on—is committed to four core and distinctive theses: simplicity, im-
mutability, timelessness, and impassibility.6
 My investigation focuses espe-
cially on the Doctrine of Divine Simplicity (DDS). According to DDS, God isutterly devoid of physical, metaphysical, and logical parts; God is identical to 
his essence, existence, attributes, action, power, and so on.7
This brings us to the second concept central to this investigation: part-
hood. Within the classical theistic tradition, each of the following—when 
distinct in a being—are typically understood as component parts: form and 
matter, essence and existence, subject and accidents, individual and its es-
sence, individual and its properties, act and potency, genus and specific dif-
ference, and agent and the agent’s actions.8
These examples of multiplicity that entail composition are helpful, but it’s 
not clear that they facilitate a precise definition of parthood as understood 
within classical theism. Fakhri usefully characterizes DDS as the thesis that 
anything intrinsic to God is identical to God.9
 Fakhri points out that this is 
a straightforward entailment of absolute divine simplicity. More generally, 
then, we can follow the classical theistic tradition in understanding a part of 
S as some positive ontological item intrinsic to S but distinct from S.10
This understanding of parts is in marked agreement with how DDS is tra-
ditionally articulated. Augustine famously put it in The City of God that God 
is what he has. And as Vallicella articulates it, “God is ontologically simple… 
there is nothing intrinsic to God that is distinct from God.”11
There are also straightforward paths from classical theism to this under-
standing of parthood. As Katherin Rogers points out, for classical theism“whatever is not God is created by Him.”12 If there were something distinct 
from God (i.e., something that is not God) intrinsic to God, then there would 
thus be some portion of creation within God. This is flatly incompatible with 
classical theism. (One reason for this is that creation is contingent, and thus if 
some portion of creation were within God, there would be some contingency 
within God. This is incompatible with classical theism’s commitment to the 
absence of intrinsic, non-essential features or accidents in God.)
The final concept crucial to this investigation is that of neo-classical theism.
13
Also known as modified classical theism, neo-classical theism affirms much 
of classical theism: God is essentially morally perfect, creates and sustains the 
world ex nihilo, exists of metaphysical necessity, and so on. But unlike classi-
cal theism, it rejects and/or modifies one or more of simplicity, immutability, 
timelessness, and impassibility. For our purposes, we will focus on neo-classical 
theism’s denial of DDS. This version of neo-classical theism holds that God has 
parts in the sense of items intrinsic to but distinct from God: multiple divine at-
tributes (like omniscience, omnipotence, etc.), potential for accidental change, 
and so on. For neo-classical theists, moreover, this multiplicity is not just on 
the part of our predications of God (e.g., various predications of ‘omniscience’, 
‘omnipotence’, and so on); the multiplicity is also on the side of God himself, 
such that God—in extramental, extralinguistic reality—genuinely has some 
positive ontological item(s) intrinsic to but distinct from himself.
With the necessary preliminaries covered, we can turn to my first set of 
criticisms of the Neo-Platonic proof.
III. PREMISE THREE
Premise three embodies what I will call the Neo-Platonic Causal Principle as 
applied to composite objects (i.e., concrete objects with parts):
Neo-Platonic Causal Principle (NPCP): Any composite object requires a 
sustaining efficient cause of its existence—that is, a cause that concurrently combines the parts together to constitute the object at any moment at which 
it exists.14
Why should we believe NPCP?
The central motivation seems to be a kind of explicability require-
ment—that is, a requirement that the combination of parts (at any given mo-
ment of a composite object’s existence) be explained. Feser proceeds through 
candidate explanations (the whole itself, say, or one or more of its parts) and 
finds them all wanting. Rejecting appeal to inexplicability or brute facts, the 
only remaining explanation (according to Feser) would be some extrinsic 
cause or principle that accounts for the unity of parts.
In order to evaluate this central motivation, let’s proceed through Feser’s 
reasons for ruling out various alternative explanations of the unity (at any giv-
en moment) of a composite object. For ease of exposition, I’ve broken down 
Feser’s reasoning into a series of four steps. Let’s consider these steps in turn.
Step one is that all composites depend on their parts. Feser writes that 
“a composite is less fundamental than its parts in the sense that its exist-
ence presupposes that its parts exist and are put together in the right way.”15
Moreover, argues Feser, “a composite depends on its parts not merely (and 
indeed not necessarily always) in a temporal sense, but more fundamentally 
(and always) in an atemporal sense.”16 At any given moment of a composite 
object’s life, the object’s “existence will presuppose that its parts exist and are 
put together in the right way at that moment.”17
One worry thus far is that the mere fact that a given composite object 
presupposes the existence and combination of its parts does not entail that it 
depends (in some metaphysical or explanatory sense) on those parts. It only entails that the existence and combination of the parts is simply a necessary con-
dition for the existence of the whole. But this only implies a kind of logical or 
counterfactual dependence, not an explanatory or metaphysical dependence.18
One way to see that logical dependence neither means nor entails explan-
atory dependence is to consider that logical dependence can be symmetric, 
whereas explanatory dependence is necessarily asymmetric. On certain plau-
sible views in the philosophy of mathematics, in any world in which Socrates 
exists, Socrates’s singleton set exists. Socrates therefore cannot exist without 
his singleton set existing. But it is likewise the case (again, under plausible 
views in the philosophy of mathematics) that singleton sets exist only in 
worlds wherein their members exist. It would follow that Socrates’s singleton 
set cannot exist without Socrates existing.19 Hence, there’s logical dependence 
in both directions. But it’s also clear that the set is in some sense a derivative
entity—it depends on the more fundamental reality of Socrates himself.
Indeed, even in the case of the radically independent God of classical the-
ism, there seem to be a whole host of necessary conditions or presuppositions 
for his existence. For instance, God’s existing and being the way he is presup-
poses the laws of identity and non-contradiction. And despite presupposing 
these as necessary conditions, God is still not dependent on another for his 
existence.
Thus, logical dependence can be symmetric. But could explanatory de-
pendence be symmetric? I don’t think so. A circle of causal or explanatory 
dependence for existence seems metaphysically impossible. For if x causes or 
explains the existence of y, and y causes or explains the existence of x, then 
x is both prior to y (on account of x’s causing/explaining y’s existence) and 
posterior to y (on account of y’s causing/explaining x’s existence). And that 
seems absurd.
But perhaps Feser’s thought is one about fundamentality or grounding: 
wholes are dependent on their parts insofar as parts are more fundamental than and/or ground the existence of their wholes. But while this might be 
true in some cases, it’s not clear that all cases of part-whole relationships fit 
this schema (especially given the broad classical theistic understanding of 
parts). It seems eminently plausible, for instance, that some wholes ground 
(the existence and/or character of) their parts. As Baddorf writes:
[I]t is far from obvious that the only kind of thing that could satisfactorily 
explain compresence is an outside sufficient cause. … [The neo-classical 
theistic] God’s tropes are dependent upon God. This suggests another 
explanation for their compresence: they are compresent because they are 
each grounded in God. This is not a causal explanation, but it is plausible 
to think that it is an explanation nonetheless. … This conclusion can also 
be supported by more general argument. It is plausible that tropes are 
individuated by their bearers and so cannot exist without them. Or, similarly, 
it is plausible to think that tropes cannot exist without their bearers since 
they are merely ways their bearers are.20
While Baddorf focuses solely on the distinction between God and his prop-
erty instances, his central point is simply that it seems eminently plausible 
that some wholes (e.g., the neo-classical God) ground their parts.
What’s more, whole-to-part explanation or grounding is a very (broadly) 
Aristotelian notion. Aristotelianism (broadly construed) conceives parts of 
substances as in some sense less fundamental than the substances they com-
pose, since their identities are intelligible only in light of the substances to 
which they belong. (For instance, something’s being my heart seems to pre-
suppose my existence as a whole, integrated substance.)
Naturally, debates concerning divine aseity overlap quite heavily with the 
considerations adduced above. According to divine aseity, God is “an abso-
lutely independent being—a being that does not depend on anything else for 
its existence.”21 One of the principal motivations for DDS derives from aseity. 
If there were some item intrinsic to but distinct from God—that is, if God 
had some part—then God would be dependent on something that is distinct 
from God. As Aquinas writes, “every composite is posterior to its component 
parts, and is dependent on them; but God is the first being.”22 One influential response to this line of reasoning derives from what Fowler calls the Doctrine 
of Divine Priority (DDP): “For all x, if x is a proper part of God or x is a prop-
erty of God, then x depends on God for its existence.”23 And since depend-
ence is asymmetric, God does not depend on God’s parts. Like Baddorf, then, 
Fowler offers whole-to-part grounding as a viable model for understanding 
divine aseity and the independence of at least one whole (viz. God).
But let’s not miss the forest for the trees. What matters for present pur-
poses is that nothing in Feser’s Neo-Platonic proof—and, moreover, noth-
ing Feser says on behalf of its premises—gives any reason for thinking that 
whole-to-part explanations of the kind considered above are impossible (or 
else insufficient to explain the compresence of an object’s parts).24 More pre-
cisely, the live possibility (and, I would argue, plausibility) of whole-to-part 
grounding renders Feser’s step one far from demonstrated. It is not at all clear 
that any whole whatsoever (explanatorily or metaphysically) depends on its 
parts, and there are plausible views in mereology and metaphysics according 
to which this step comes out false. Nothing in Feser’s step justifies a denial of 
these mereological and metaphysical positions.
Let’s turn, then, to step two: wholes cannot cause the combination of their 
parts. Feser writes the following in connection to a chair (the whole) and its 
parts:
How do the parts of a composite come together to form the whole? It can’t 
be the composite itself that causes this to happen. … [A]t any particular 
moment, the existence of the whole depends on the existence and proper 
arrangement of the parts. And the chair as a whole can’t be the cause of those 
parts existing, and being assembled in just the right way, at that moment. 
We would in that case have an explanatory vicious circle, insofar as the 
existence of the whole would depend on the existence and arrangement of the parts, and the existence and arrangement of the parts would depend on 
the existence of the whole.25
The problem with this step, though, is that even granting that wholes can-
not efficiently cause the existence of their parts, this by no means entails that 
wholes cannot explain their parts. We’ve already seen defensible views accord-
ing to which wholes can non-causally explain (i.e., ground) their parts. And 
because vicious explanatory circularity is impossible, it follows that in cases of 
whole-to-part grounding, the parts do not explain the existence of the whole.
Step three of Feser’s case for NPCP is that it’s clear that there are extrinsic 
causal factors that sustain composite objects in existence:
[T]he existence and arrangement of the chair’s parts at any moment does 
not depend on the chair itself, but on myriad other factors. … The legs and 
screws themselves exist at that moment because their respective molecules 
exist and are combined in certain specific ways… Then there are other 
factors, such as the temperature in the room in which the chair sits being 
within the right range. … At any moment at which they exist, their parts 
exist and are arranged in just the right way, and that is the case only because 
various other factors exist and are combined in just the right way at that 
moment. Composite things have causes…26
There are several problems with this step. First, even if it’s true that macro-
scopic physical objects clearly have such causes (in virtue of their situatedness 
within a physical context wherein a host of purportedly external conditions 
must be in place), it by no means follows from this that any composite object 
whatsoever requires an efficient sustaining cause.
Consider, for instance, the God of neo-classical theism. According to the 
classical theistic understanding of parts, the neo-classical God is a composite 
object. But it is not at all clear that there must be a sustaining efficient cause 
of his existence. (Indeed, it’s not at all clear how there could be). He is not 
situated within a physical context; he does not require a host of conditions to 
be in place in order to exist (like temperature, pressure, etc.); he is a neces-
sary being; and he causes the existence of every concrete object apart from 
himself. Under such an understanding, it is simply metaphysically impossible
for there to be a pre-existing context of concrete objects that causally sustain 
the neo-classical God’s existence, since there being such a context already pre-supposes the neo-classical God’s free creative activity. Nothing Feser says in 
any of the steps justifies a demand for a sustaining cause of the neo-classical 
God’s existence.27
Or consider a naturalistic view according to which there exist ultimate, 
fundamental constituents of physical reality (whether they be particles (like 
quarks), one or more quantum fields, superstrings, the universal wave-
function, or whatever). Now, while these may be physically non-compos-
ite—quarks and superstrings, for instance, are not (or would not be) built up 
or constructed out of physical parts—they are nevertheless metaphysically
composite under the classical theistic understanding of parthood articulat-
ed in §2. What matters for present purposes is that no reason is given as to 
why these (metaphysically) composite objects are likewise situated within a 
physical context wherein a host of external sustaining causes must operate in 
harmony in order for such objects to exist. It’s not at all clear why or how tem-
perature, pressure, and the other factors cited are even relevant to the ground 
layer of physical reality. After all, such a ground layer is precisely that which 
ultimately accounts for how such physical contexts could even arise in the 
first place—and so it would be absurd for there to be a more fundamental, 
pre-existent physical context that sustains them in being.
Now, one might at this juncture raise worries for this last example. Here 
are two worries one might level. First, one might question whether there 
even is such a fundamental, ultimate ground layer of physical reality. That’s 
a good question, but it doesn’t adequately consider the dialectical context at 
hand. Feser is aiming to give a positive demonstration of NPCP. One of the 
approaches he takes to justifying this is step three (as I’ve outlined it), which 
appeals to (purportedly) clear cases of composite objects’ being sustained in 
being by a pre-existent physical context. But as I argued in the previous para-
graph, one clear way to circumvent this justification is to hold that there is
such a fundamental, ground layer to physical reality that provides a context for less fundamental physical realities but does not itself have some more fun-
damental physical context. Given that this circumvents step three, it follows 
that the success of step three as a justification for (or part of a justification for) 
NPCP presupposes that there couldn’t be such a fundamental, ground layer as 
I’ve described it. The onus of justification is therefore on Feser to justify why 
there couldn’t be such a layer. Without such justification, step three rests on 
an unjustified assumption.
A second worry one might raise is that while there may not be a physical 
sustaining cause for this ground layer of physical reality, there must never-
theless be a non-physical cause sustaining it in being. But once again, this 
misses the dialectical context at hand. For even if it’s true that a non-physical 
sustaining cause is required, nothing in step three justifies this. Step three 
simply adduces a broader physical context in which non-fundamental physi-
cal objects are situated. But no reason (thus far) has been given as to why 
there must exist a non-physical sustaining cause of this fundamental layer of 
physical reality. This bridges nicely into step four, one wherein Feser aims to 
do precisely that.
In the fourth and final step, Feser extends his arguments concerning 
physical composition to metaphysical composition:
The point is just that what has been said here about ordinary physical parts 
like chair legs and screws would be true also of metaphysical parts like form 
and matter, if they exist. … For on the Aristotelian analysis, the form of 
something like copper or a tree is, all by itself and apart from matter, a mere 
abstraction rather than a concrete object. … But matter all by itself and 
apart from any form is, for the Aristotelian, nothing but the potential to be 
something. It is only actually some thing if it has the form of some particular 
kind of thing. So, though form and matter are different, there is a sense in 
which form depends on matter and matter depends on form. We would thus 
have an explanatory vicious circle if there were not something outside them 
which accounted for their combination.28
Feser then goes on to apply the same reasoning to other (purported) forms 
of metaphysical composition, like essence-existence composition. There are, 
however, several problems with this fourth step. First, it’s quite dialectically limited insofar as it rests on contentious commitments to various kinds of 
metaphysical parts.29
Second, even granting such commitments, surely vicious explanatory 
circles are metaphysically impossible regardless of whether there’s an extrin-
sic cause accounting for the viciously intertwined things. As we saw earlier, 
vicious explanatory circularity implies that x causes or grounds or explains 
y while y causes or grounds or explains x. This is impossible regardless of 
whether there is some z that accounts for both x and y, since the very fact of 
the vicious circularity entails that x is both prior and posterior (i.e., not prior) 
to y, which is absurd. If hylemorphism entails that two distinct things are vi-
ciously intertwined—such that the existence of each explains the existence of 
the other—then that would simply be a reductio of hylomorphism. Far from 
demonstrating the need for an extrinsic sustaining cause of any composite 
object, Feser’s step four seems to impute a metaphysical impossibility to com-
posite (material) objects from the get-go.
30
Third, this hylemorphic argument, even if successful, would only show 
that material objects require something apart from them to explain them. 
It entails nothing about (say) the neo-classical God. And so it fails to justify 
NPCP as applied to non-material composite things.31
Fourth, there seem to be perfectly legitimate explanations of the combi-
nation of parts that avoid vicious circularity but that don’t adduce extrinsic 
sustaining efficient causes. For instance, there is the whole-to-part grounding that I covered earlier.32 Another seemingly legitimate candidate explanation 
for the unity of an object’s parts is that it is metaphysically necessary that they 
be so combined. If we take the ultimate reality (be it the neo-classical God or 
some ground layer of physical reality) to be a necessary being, the unity of its 
parts could easily be explained in terms of the metaphysical necessity of said 
unity. Now, I’m not claiming that metaphysical necessity categorically pre-
cludes any further explanation. Rather, I’m simply noting that metaphysical 
necessity may plausibly itself constitute a kind of explanation for something’s 
obtaining. Even if the reader disagrees with this, the point is that nothing 
in Feser’s Neo-Platonic proof gives those who accept (or are neutral on) the 
explanatory legitimacy (in principle) of metaphysical necessity any reason to 
abandon their position.33
A third seemingly legitimate candidate explanation is that the kind of thing 
in question simply requires the obtaining of the explanandum. For instance, 
perhaps the neo-classical theistic God’s essence simply requires existence, or 
perhaps unlimited perfection requires existence. And the legitimacy of this 
form of explanation seems eminently plausible. Consider the properties ‘being 
triangular’ and ‘being trilateral’ (which are, again, parts according to the clas-
sical theistic understanding of parthood). Why are these co-instantiated? Be-
cause they are simply the kinds of properties that require co-instantiation. This 
seems to be a perfectly legitimate explanation of their compresence or unity 
in something. It does seem odd to demand some sort of concurrent sustaining 
cause keeping the two properties together. And this plausibly generalizes to a 
being whose parts are all the kinds of things that require their unity and co-
instantiation. (This is compounded even further if there is a kind of intrinsic 
intelligibility to the parts’ unity together: it is no coincidence, for instance, that 
omnipotence, omniscience, and moral perfection are all compresent and uni-
fied together in the neo-classical theistic God.)
Here’s a fourth seemingly legitimate candidate explanation. It seems that 
the neo-classical theist (if they’re unwilling to adopt any of the above expla-
nations) could be well within their rights in holding that the unity of God’s 
parts flows from one simple component of God. Perhaps pure perfection 
is the root, the core, the fundamental aspect of God. From pure perfection 
flows the purely positive great-making properties like omniscience, omnipo-
tence, essential moral goodness, and so on. Pure perfection is like a spring 
from which flow the individual perfections or great-making properties. In 
this case, we have one ‘divine part’ (in the broad, classical theistic sense) that 
explains the unity of God’s parts: all the distinct properties and powers flow 
from or are explained by the simple property of sheer perfection. Once again, 
we have an explanation of the unity of the parts here, but nothing outside of 
or external to God is explaining or causing the unity.34
Here’s a fifth seemingly legitimate explanation of the combination of a 
(temporal) composite object O’s parts at non-first moments of its existence. 
For O’s parts to fail to be combined at moment m despite being combined 
from [m*, m), m* < m, is for some change to occur.35 But a change occurs 
only if some factor causally induces said change. Hence, if no factor causally 
induces a change, then the change won’t occur. Thus, if no factor causally 
induces O’s parts to fail to be combined at m despite being combined from 
[m*, m), then O’s parts are combined at m. Once we add that nothing came 
along to causally induce this—that is, once we add that nothing came along 
to destroy O (or O’s parts) or to separate O’s parts from m* to m—it simply 
follows that O’s parts are combined at m. Here, we seem to have a perfectly 
respectable, perfectly legitimate explanation of the combination of O’s parts 
at m, and this explanation adduces facts outside of or extrinsic to O at m.
There are many more legitimate explanations besides, but I shan’t ex-
plore them for purposes of space. What matters here is that Feser’s arguments 
for NPCP do nothing to address such alternative explanations. The central 
takeaway of this section, then, is as follows. The detractor of classical the-
ism—whether it be a neo-classical theist or a non-theist—need not appeal 
to inexplicability or brute facts to account for unity. There are perfectly sensi-
ble explanations that don’t adduce sustaining efficient causes. I conclude that 
Feser’s third premise (i.e., NPCP) is not only unjustified but also dialectically ill-situated (insofar as detractors of classical theism have perfectly legitimate 
alternative explanations of unity).
III.1 Mindedness
One final issue I wish to address in this section is Feser’s inference to the 
mindedness of the absolutely simple being. Feser argues in premise twenty-
two that “[e]verything is either a mind, or a mental content, or a material 
entity, or an abstract entity.”36 From this it is concluded that the absolutely 
simple being must be a mind.
Curiously, though, Feser gives no justification for this premise but instead 
cites Vallicella—who himself gives no justification for the claim.37 Indeed, 
it seems eminently (epistemically) possible at least in principle that there be 
a non-physical or non-material, non-mental concrete entity. Simply consid-
er an impersonal principle from which all complexity and multiplicity de-
rives—akin to Plotinus’s One (which, as we will see below, is prior in being to 
Mind). In fact, we might plausibly take the Neo-Platonic proof (ignoring its 
other problems) as an argument for this different category of thing.
Plotinus himself decidedly rejected a view according to which the abso-
lutely simple, radically independent One (which transcends all multiplicity, 
qualification, and differentiation) is mental in the sense of something capable 
of thought and understanding. As Gavrilyuk notes, for Plotinus “Mind (nous), 
as the repository of the eternal Forms, represents a perfectly unified plurality, 
rather than perfect simplicity. For this reason, the divine Nous must be the 
second hypostasis, which derives from and is ontologically subordinate to the 
One.”38 The One’s absolute simplicity prevents mentality, since mentality (for 
Plotinus) requires at least the duality of the knower and the known, a duality 
which emerges first in the Divine Mind (the Nous). This duality (multiplicity, 
plurality) is foreign to the One.39
This bridges nicely into the final problem for Feser’s inference to minded-
ness: it’s not at all clear how mindedness could be compatible with absolute 
simplicity. One problem derives from the (plausibly) necessary existence of 
abstracta. We might plausibly think that some propositions (say) are neces-
sarily true and hence necessarily exist (provided that x cannot be anything 
(e.g., true, correspondent with reality, etc.) without existing).40 Or we might 
follow realist intuitions about the necessary existence of numbers, universals, 
or what have you.
Trouble arises when we consider that (i) the existence of anything dis-
tinct from God presupposes God’s free creative act and (ii) abstracta are dis-
tinct from God. Point (i) is a core commitment of classical theism: God is the 
sole ultimate reality from which all else derives its being. As Kerr points out, 
God “is the unique subsisting source of being from which all existing things 
come.”41 Moreover, God is free to create or refrain from creating.42 And point 
(ii) seems evident: there’s a multiplicity of abstracta, but there isn’t a multi-
plicity of God. God is not identical to the number two, nor is he identical to 
the proposition that one and one make two, and nor is he identical to the 
universal humanity.
The result seems to be an inconsistent triad:
1. Abstracta (or some subset thereof) exist necessarily.
2. Abstracta are distinct from God.
3. Anything distinct from God requires God’s free creative bestowal of 
being—a bestowal God is free to give or not to give.
For given (3), anything distinct from God is contingent (i.e., possibly absent 
from reality)—it requires God’s creative actualization, something God is free 
to perform or not perform. But given (1) and (2), that can’t be the case. To avoid the inconsistency, it seems that the classical theist must maintain one 
or more of the following:
4. Abstracta either exist contingently or do not exist at all.
5. Abstracta are identical to God.
6. Either God is necessitated or compelled to create something distinct 
from himself, or there exist things distinct from God not resulting 
from God’s creative actualization.
None of (4)-(6) look very attractive for the classical theist, however. Claim 
(4) denies plausible realist intuitions either about the existence of abstracta 
or their necessary existence. Claim (5) seems clearly wrongheaded: surely 
God cannot be identical to the number two and the number seven, since 
two is even while seven is not even. God cannot be both even and not even.43
Claim (6) also seems quite unappealing. Surely God couldn’t be necessitated 
or compelled to create, and surely God must be fully provident and sovereign 
over the existence of everything distinct from himself (which he wouldn’t be 
if there existed necessary abstracta over which he has no control). We have 
seen, moreover, that classical theism itself seems to commit to the denial of 
(6).
But perhaps there’s a via media: locate abstracta within the divine mind 
as thoughts and concepts (or otherwise grounded in such things). This, how-
ever, seems inconsistent with absolute simplicity. So long as such abstracta 
are not identical to God, they will thereby be parts of God (per the classical 
theistic understanding of parthood canvassed in §2). They will be positive 
ontological items intrinsic to but distinct from God.
Even if this latter point is denied, a plausible mereological principle sup-
ports the same conclusion. This principle states that if x is intrinsic to y, and 
x is composite, then y is thereby composite (i.e., not absolutely simple). The 
principle is entailed by the classical theistic understanding of parthood. For 
suppose x is composite and intrinsic to y. Now suppose, for reductio, that 
y is non-composite. Well, since x is composite while y is non-composite, it 
follows that x is distinct from y. So, x is intrinsic to y but distinct from y. But 
that’s precisely the classical theistic understanding of parthood. Hence, y is composite after all. But we assumed y was non-composite. Contradiction. 
Thus, the fact that x is composite and intrinsic to y entails that y is composite. 
(Given, of course, the classical theistic understanding of parthood.)
But according to the aforementioned via media, abstracta are intrinsic 
to God. So, if abstracta are composite, it would follow that God is composite 
(per the mereological principle).
But it’s plausible that some abstracta are composite given the classical the-
ist understanding of parthood. As we saw in §2, properties are explicitly con-
ceived as parts. This is precisely why classical theists insist that God cannot 
have a multiplicity of properties, as that would introduce composition into 
God. But abstracta plausibly have a whole host of properties. For instance, 
if we reject deflationism about truth and instead adopt a correspondence 
theory according to which truth is a property of propositions, it follows that 
propositions are composite things. They also have properties of aboutness 
or representation, of correspondence, and so on. Or consider the number 
two. Surely it has properties like being even, being prime, and so on. If these 
(seemingly) common sense claims about abstracta are true, it follows that ab-
stracta are composite things. And hence it follows—assuming that we locate 
abstracta in some way or another in the divine intellect—that God is com-
posite. (Moreover, classical theists typically wish to affirm that there can only 
be one absolutely simple thing in principle—in which case, abstracta cannot 
be simple but instead must be composite.)
Not only does the Neo-Platonic proof not justify premise three, then, but 
it also doesn’t deliver the mindedness of the absolutely simple being. And 
not only that, but it seems to militate against the mindedness of such a being 
(given other commitments of classical theism as well as certain core realist 
intuitions). Next I turn to new problems for the Neo-Platonic proof from 
Trinitarianism.
IV. TRINITARIANISM
Orthodox, conciliar Trinitarianism (henceforth ‘Trinitarianism’) has a vari-
ety of core commitments. Mullins identifies at least four: (i) there are three 
divine persons; (ii) the divine persons are not numerically identical to one another; (iii) the divine persons share the same divine essence; and (iv) the 
divine persons are related so that there is only one God.44
These core theses point to a distinction between person and nature. In 
particular, (T3) requires that there is only one divine nature. By contrast, (T1) 
requires that there are three persons. There is thus some distinction between 
person and nature here.
We need not get bogged down here in defining ‘person’ and ‘nature’, since 
nothing in my arguments to come crucially hinges on such definitions. For 
now, we can follow Timothy Pawl in understanding a person as a hypostasis 
(supposit) of a rational nature.
45 As for ‘nature’, we can understand it in terms 
of something’s essence, the what-it-is-to-be that thing. In the context of Trini-
tarianism and the Incarnation, it is not some abstract Platonic universal but 
rather a concrete, immanent essence within something that makes it what it 
is.46 In any case, it is important to keep this distinction between person and 
nature in mind as we proceed.
In the following sections, I will argue that the Neo-Platonic proof is in-
imical to Trinitarianism on numerous fronts.
VI.1 Uniqueness
The first problem derives from Feser’s inference to the uniqueness of the ab-
solutely simple being. Feser writes:
For suppose there were two or more noncomposite or utterly simple causes 
of things. Then there would have to be some feature the possession of which 
distinguishes one of them from the other. Noncomposite or simple cause A 
would differ from noncomposite or simple cause B insofar as A has feature F, 
which B lacks, and B has feature G, which A lacks. But in that case neither A 
nor B would really be simple or noncomposite after all. A would be a simple 
or noncomposite cause plus F, and B would be a simple or noncomposite 
cause plus G. F and G would be different parts, one of which each of these 
causes has and the other of which it lacks.47
The central premise employed here seems to be that for there to be two or 
more x’s, there would have to be some feature in virtue of which they are 
individuated. And since the possession of such a feature entails composition, 
there could not in principle be two or more absolutely simple beings.
But this line of reasoning seems incompatible with Trinitarianism. For the 
exact same reasoning equally applies to there being two or more divine persons; 
the need for some individuating feature to distinguish two or more x’s seems 
a perfectly general one, applying to all x’s. The main reason favoring such a 
demand seems to be explicability: if there were no feature that one of x1
 or x2
possesses that the other doesn’t, then (so the reasoning goes) the fact that x1
 and 
x2
 are distinct is inexplicable. In other words, if x1
 and x2
 share all and only the 
same features, then the non-identity between x1
 and x2
 would be inexplicable. 
But this motivation seems entirely general, applying to any distinct items.
And if that’s true, then it equally applies to divine persons. In order for 
there to be more than one divine person, there would have to be some feature 
that one had that the others lacked. But in that case—per Feser’s own reason-
ing—the divine person would not be absolutely simple (and hence wouldn’t 
be divine after all!).
Moreover, Feser’s inference to uniqueness (which, as we’ve seen, seems 
inimical to Trinitarianism) plays an essential role in his argument. For with-
out uniqueness, we face the quantifier shift problem: merely from the fact 
that each chain of causes-of-unity has a first non-composite member, it does 
not follow that there is a single first member for all such chains. And without 
uniqueness in place, the inferences to various other divine attributes are un-
dercut. For instance, Feser’s inference to omnipotence presupposes that every 
(possible) composite being must derive its being from the causal activity of 
the single absolutely simple being—for only then is it true that such a being 
is that from which all possible being (and all possible causal powers) derives.
Let’s turn next to a second tension between the Neo-Platonic proof and 
Trinitarianism.
IV.2 NPCP and the Trinity
Consider again NPCP’s primary motivation: explicability. More specifically, 
the compresence of distinct elements together into a unified being demands 
some explanation—and because the explanation cannot be in terms of the being itself or one of its parts, an extrinsic cause (so the argument goes) is 
required.
But the exact same motivation for demanding an extrinsic cause of the 
unity of composite objects seems equally to apply to the multiplicity of di-
vine persons unified in a single Godhead. In other words, there seems to be 
no justification for NPCP that doesn’t also justify demanding a cause of any 
Trinitarian being. There seems to be no non-question-begging, non-arbitrary, 
principled way to delineate the demand for an extrinsic cause of unity in the 
case of things that are composites of (say) distinct attributes, or of essence 
and accident, or what have you (on the one hand) and things within which 
there is a multiplicity of distinct persons and processions (on the other hand).
Indeed, the fact of distinct x’s within a being—i.e., a multiplicity or dif-
ferentiation among distinct ontological items—is precisely what requires an 
extrinsic cause in Plotinus’s view. For Plotinus, the One’s simplicity is utterly 
unqualified.48 At “Enn. 6.9.4 Plotinus observes that… the One transcends all 
differentiations characteristic of being… Plotinian simplicity excludes any 
multiplicity.”49 Anything apart from the One requires a cause for the unity 
of its multiplicity, distinction, differentiation, and qualification. Hence, for 
Plotinus, a differentiation or multiplicity of distinct divine persons would de-
mand an extrinsic sustaining cause.
Clearly the Trinitarian God cannot have an extrinsic sustaining cause of 
its being. But what, then, could explain the unity of the distinct persons in 
God? If the answer is that there’s no explanation, then that seems to be a per-
fectly legitimate move for the detractor of the Neo-Platonic proof in explain-
ing the most fundamental composite thing(s). If the answer is that it’s simply 
metaphysically necessary that there be three distinct persons unified in one 
God, then that also seems to be a perfectly legitimate move for the detractor 
of the Neo-Platonic proof.
Perhaps the explanation is in terms of one of those very divine persons 
(the Father, say)? But once again this will undercut the Neo-Platonic proof. 
For this explanation amounts to the proposal that one of the x1
, x2
, … xn
 ex-
plains the unity of those very x’s. But once this kind of explanation is granted, 
then it seems that the unity of the fundamental composite object(s) could be explained in virtue of one (or more) of its parts. If one of those very x’s can ex-
plain the unity of them all, then it seems this should equally be the case when 
the ontological items in question (the x’s) are parts.
50 And hence it would not 
necessarily be the case that any composite object must be explained in terms 
of some extrinsic sustaining cause.
Perhaps there is some fourth thing, some fundamental aspect of God, that 
explains or accounts for their unity? But (i) this is incompatible with DDS 
(since this thing would be some positive ontological item within but distinct 
from God himself), and (ii) this reduces to the answer in the previous para-
graph, since there’s the further question of what explains the unity or togeth-
erness or compresence of {Father, Son, Holy Spirit, this fourth fundamental 
aspect of God}. And any explanation in terms of the final element in the set 
is just to cite one of the very x’s among x1
, x2
, … xn
 to account for their unity.
Fundamentally, then, my challenge for the Trinitarian proponent of the 
Neo-Platonic proof is as follows. When it comes to explaining to unity (to-
getherness, conjoined-ness, compresence) of the distinct divine persons in 
one being (the Godhead or G), the explanation is either (i) internal to G, 
(ii) external to G, (iii) G itself, or else (iv) there is no explanation. But if the 
explanation is internal to G, then something within a unified plurality can 
explain the unity of said plurality—in which case, the same could apply to 
the objects within NPCP’s domain of quantification, thereby undermining 
NPCP’s demand for an outside explanation of such objects. If the explanation 
is external to G, then there is something outside of or external to God which 
explains something about God, which is obviously incompatible with classi-
cal theism. If the explanation is G itself, then an object within which there is 
a unified plurality can explain the unity of said plurality without recourse to 
any external thing—in which case, the same could apply to the objects with-
in NPCP’s domain of quantification, thereby undermining NPCP’s demand 
for an outside explanation of such objects. Finally, if there is no explanation, 
then once again the same could apply to the domain of NPCP, thereby under-
mining it. Thus, either classical theism is false, or else NPCP (and, hence, the 
Neo-Platonic proof itself) is undermined.
In general, then, it seems that any proposal for explaining the unity of 
the distinct Trinitarian persons will undercut NPCP and a fortiori the Neo-Platonic proof. Trinitarianism is therefore inimical to the Neo-Platonic proof 
in yet another way.
V. CONCLUSION
We’ve canvassed a variety of responses to the Neo-Platonic proof in this ar-
ticle. We found first that premise three is both unjustified and dialectically 
ill-situated. We then found that the Neo-Platonic proof fails to deliver the 
mindedness of the absolutely simple being and arguably militates against
mindedness. We then examined two tensions between Trinitarianism and 
the Neo-Platonic proof.
There are, of course, other lines of response I haven’t explored in this 
article. For instance, one might adduce configurational or existential iner-
tia—the thesis that composites (or at least ultimate, fundamental compos-
ites) retain their unity in the absence of both causal sustenance and causal 
destruction—in response to the demand for a sustaining cause of composite 
objects.51 Or one might challenge the constituent ontology underlying the 
argument. Or one might challenge the argument’s reliance on the impossibil-
ity of infinitely descending chains of hierarchical dependence. Or one might 
challenge Feser’s stage two inferences and instead opt for a view on which 
there is an absolutely simple, mindless, impersonal, universal principle or 
source of all multiplicity. And so on.
But concerning the lines of response I have explored, their aim is to serve
debates about models of God and ultimate reality. They are meant to be tools
that invite further inquiry. It is my hope that I have accomplished this task.52
