CONVERGENCES BETWEEN PLATONISM AND THE ABRAHAMIC RELIGIONS

a guest lecture sponsored by the Departments of Classics, English, Philosophy and Religion at 

Smith College on October 17, 2013 

Wayne J. Hankey 

Department of Classics, Dalhousie University 

A. INTRODUCTION

I am happy to begin with a thank you to my sponsors. I am especially pleased that my lecture has 

the support the English Department, because when I was an undergraduate, more than fifty years 

ago, Arthur Lovejoy’s The Great Chain of Being (first published 1936 by Harvard) was 

compulsory reading in the English Department. It provided then most of what was generally 

known about the Middle and Neo Platonisms and their influence; this is what I shall largely end 

up talking about today. It delights me to remember that in those days, Thomas Taylor’s 1816 

translation of the massive Platonic Theology of Proclus was always out of the library because kept 

on more or less permanent loan in the study of a Professor of English. 

I am, however, equally, somewhat daunted. What I conceived as a rather informal talk, 

based in materials I am using in recent undergraduate lectures, offered at the generous invitation of 

a former student, now a distinguished scholar, has turned into something demanding. I am 

encouraged to present what I had gathered for my students from Carlos Fraenkel’s new 

Philosophical Religions From Plato to Spinoza: Reason, Religion, and Autonomy

1

It adds to the 

loci in Plato, as source and authority, and to the Jewish, Christian, and Islamic derivations (not 

being precise about the relation) up to modernity. It also gives room for me to present the other 

side of philosophical religion, the one Dr Fraenkel does not treat. What belongs to the God 

beyond Being and Intellect, a sphere where Plato, and even more, Neoplatonism, is equally 

important. I am also heartened by the example of an influential scholar who makes no claim to 

being a philosopher. Diarmaid MacCulloch’s Christianity: The First Three Thousand Years

2

starts in Greece with the logos.

3

 Nonetheless, this is a modestly conceived talk, so please allow me 

to begin by saying what I shall not do. 

I shall deal scarcely at all with practice: ethical, liturgical, or ascetic, keeping almost 

exclusively to doctrine. In respect to doctrines, I shall make no attempt to be complete either in 

terms of their number or their instances. My examples will be ones common to the three 

Abrahamic religions, but the list is not exhaustive. Within Platonism, I shall include that self-styled 

“Platonist”, Aristotle, and the many constitutive Aristotelian features of Middle and Neo 

Platonism. I shall, however, say little about the Peripatetics, because, except insofar as they have 

absorbed Neoplatonism, their positions, for example on the eternity of the world and the limits of 

providence are the ones rejected by normative theologians of the Abrahamic religions. The Platonic 

metaphysical account of the spiritual world will be held to in contrast to the Stoic physical one, 

though the Platonist assimilation of Stoic, Skeptic, Epicurean, and Cynic spiritual disciplines will 

be assumed. 

B. WHY PLATO AND ABRAHAM CONVERGE

All this will raise the question of the cause of the convergences between these "pagan" (or, more

politely, "Hellenic") forms and ideas and those of the Abrahamic religions with different common, and self-consciously, more authoritative, origins in Judaea and Arabia. I shall not attempt to decide 

whether the convergences stem from complementarity, or from conscious or unconscious 

subversion, or from the ultimate singleness of truth and its source. 

Dr Fraenkel does an excellent job of presenting the pre-modern answers to the question of 

convergence in terms of the singleness of truth, its dual representations in reason and imagination, 

and their unity in the exalted religious founder and prophet, whether Abraham, Moses, Jesus, Paul, 

or Mohammed, but this is usually found to be incredible today. 

In my view the alternative answers developed from the time of the Protestant Reform in 

the 16th century are either impossible or dangerous or both, but I leave all this open for discussion, 

if you desire.4

 However, it can be said that, from the time of the definitive ancient joining of 

Hellenic philosophy and Jewish Scripture in Philo Judaeus, two convictions determining a single 

method effected the convergence of the two forms of infallible truth. 

First, the philosophers sought and, in Platonic tradition, supposed they had found, a single 

First Principle;5

 the theologians of the Abrahamic religions supposed that their Scriptures revealed 

the same. In other words, in the end, both philosophy and Scriptural religion were monotheistic, 

although, for both, there were lots of subordinate spirits. 

Second, for the normative Abrahamic theologians, whether there was a divine union with 

or mediated communication to the human, or an extinguishing identification beyond assimilation 

to the First, as Intellect, or above it, there is only one truth. The theory of “double truths”, in the 

sense of contradictory ones, is a polemic misrepresentation used by adversaries. There are certainly

at least two, and probably more, modes of representation, but what Scripture revealed could not 

contradict what reason using the methods of philosophical logic demonstrated in the strict sense. 

Prophetic inspiration might supplement what philosophy demonstrated both in doctrine and for 

the myriads of practical judgments, but there could not be contradiction. In consequence, the same 

methods which the Hellenic philosophers and theologians had used to make inspired poetry 

conform to truth known philosophically were now employed and expanded to achieve the same 

result for the revealed Scriptures of the Jewish, Christian, and Islamic religions. It is important that 

the most clear statements on these principles and procedures were given by Averroes (Ibn Rushd), 

Moses Maimonides, and Thomas Aquinas. Of these three, the Jewish and the Christian 

philosophical theologians asserted Scriptural revelations beyond the reach of philosophical reason; 

the Islamic did not. But Averroes was combating al-Ghazali who had made such an assertion, and 

he was, nonetheless, devoted to philosophical truth.6

C. SOME CONVERGENCES

My list of convergences makes use of Powerpoint slides not reproduced here. 

I. I begin at the further end temporally with FORMULARIES OF THE CHURCHES OF THE 

MAGISTERIAL REFORMATION: Lutheran, Calvinist, and Anglican, from the 16th and 17th centuries, because their Platonism might have been forgotten, or even denied, by some, because they show the 

extent of what will be called the “Hellenization” of Christianity at the historical point when 

analysis in these terms is a criticism, and because these formularies are still authoritative for some 

churches. I include the Baltimore Catechism because it is authoritative American Roman Catholic 

teaching and because the philosophical doctrines are matched by Scriptural texts which it is 

supposed teach the same, the convergence before our eyes! 

II. GNOTHI SEAUTON. 

I must go on to locate the origins of this early Modern Christian theology in Platonic 

philosophical religion but, before doing so, we shall look at another essential aspect of the 

Augustinianism of Modern Latin Christianity, the unity of philosophy, theology and spirituality in 

the mutual interplay of knowledge of God and self-knowledge. We look at the same doctrine, 

simultaneously an exhortation, in three sharply different sorts of 16th and 17th century texts: the 

Institutes of the Christian Religion of Jean Calvin, the Meditations on First Philosophy of René 

Descartes, and Connoissance de Dieu et de Soi-Même written by the greatest preacher of the 

French Catholic Church under Louis XIVth and the Tutor for his Dauphin. The Platonic teaching 

about the human and divine, and the spiritual discipline they communicate come from Augustine 

both directly and mediated by such works as Anselm’s Proslogion and the Itinerarium Mentis in 

Deum of Bonaventure.

Augustine tells us that he was led to the introspective mutually implicated knowledge of 

what the divine and human are (and so to other essentials of Christian doctrine and practice) by 

reading the “books of the Platonists” (Confessions VII) and this is generally agreed to mean at 

least several treatises of Plotinus. So we go on to look at the origin of this aspect of Platonism in 

the philosophic religion of Socrates. 

Plato and Aristotle reverse Socratic philosophical religion where it agrees with the poets as 

the inspired revealers of Hellenic religion. For Socrates only God is wise and the Delphic Gnothi 

seauton is directed against hubristic human pretence to know. In contrast, for Plato and Aristotle, 

it is a command to know what we are through knowing the divine, so (to quote Aristotle who will 

be taken up by Plotinus in this and much else) “being human we are not to think like mortals” but 

rather strive to participate the divine life. 

The modern texts with which we began this part of the lecture most closely reproduce the 

doctrine of a dialogue which was almost certainly not their direct source, the Alcibiades Major of 

Plato. In it Socrates, as the faithful lover, is represented in conversation with Athens’ most fatally 

beautiful kouros. In the dialogue read early by those being educated in the Neoplatonic schools, 

the Oracle’s admonition is interpreted so as to require knowledge of self through the higher 

namely: the soul, the true lover and guide, and God. Mirroring, crucial to the understanding both 

of what is (as theophany) and our knowing in the Platonic philosophical-religious tradition is 

essential here. Bonaventure’s Itinerarium mentis in Deum is an infinitely complex system of 

mirrors, as indeed is the Niche of Lights by al-Ghazali—both of them are systems of mediations 

derived at least in part from Platonism. 

Plotinus will take up the disciplines and doctrine of the Alcibiades and Aristotle’s NOUS, 

as the second divine hypostasis. The soul must become intellectual through it, in order to know its 

nature and origin on its way to stand before the One. Before a glance at one of his treatises read by 

Augustine, we must look at texts by the most important figure for the convergence of Hellenism 

and the Abrahamic religions, Philo Judaeus of Alexandria. With Philo the human participation in 

the divine at the heart of the Platonic-Aristotelian tradition is mediated through the divine-human monad of Moses.7

 Philosopher-King, priest and prophet in the sillage of Plato’s ideal ruler, this 

Moses is the model on which the Christian Emperor, and the constitution of the Christianised 

Roman Empire, will be authoritatively imagined by Eusebius and, I think though cannot prove, the 

Philosopher-King-Imam will be formed by al-Farabi. Certainly Philo’s unification of the offices is 

important for the Christian understanding of what the Christ is.

8 Philo’s Moses is mediator, or 

creator, within Platonism, of what will much later be called mystical union. The assimilation of 

Philo’s Moses to the divine LOGOS, and his becoming paradigmatic thereby, are certainly 

transmitted to Dionysius the Areopagite by way of Gregory of Nyssa with immeasurably huge 

influence for the Christian Platonist tradition of the God beyond Being. The ascent of Philo’s 

Moses into the darkness at the top of the mountain may also be an important moment in noetic,

or intellectual, mysticism, such as that of Augustine, in the alternative Platonic-Aristotelian 

theological tradition, the God which is pure Being identical with Thinking. Plotinus is the most 

important -guide of both mystical itineraria for the Abrahamic religions. His guidance is usually so 

mediated as to be unknown, but this cannot be the case for Augustine who reproduces the states of

ascent and union described by Plotinus in Plotinus’ language, although Augustinian mysticism 

emphasises the intellect and its work.9

I have placed material outlining the Christian Imperial (East and West) and the Islamic 

taking up of the unification of offices in the successors of Philo’s Moses in an Excursus. 

Plotinus appears with an anagogy on which Augustine is clearly dependent and which is 

reflected in his account of what he learned from the libri Platonicorum.

I conclude this journey with a passage from Ibn Tufayl’s Hayy Ibn Yaqzan with a clear 

derivation from Avicenna. It exhibits a knowledge of self by way of the knowledge of God as 

necessary self-existent which is not at all in the line from Augustine. 

Ibn Tufayl’s Hayy Ibn Yaqzan brings to mind that, before passing on to what can now be 

little more than a list of other convergences, I must mention, although I can do no more than that 

here, an alternative Platonic – Peripatetic tradition dealing with self-reflexivity to the one I have 

somewhat exhibited. The tradition from which I have outlined some elements depends on the soul 

having access to its own essence in self-reflexivity and to the noetic by way of mental interiority. 

Among Christians Augustine is the great propagator of that tradition. There is another tradition 

which comes from the Neoplatonic understanding of thinking and being as the return of the One 

upon itself. It combines elements from Plato and from Aristotle. Although the fundamental logic is 

established in Plotinus, this is especially worked out by Proclus and is important both within the 

Islamic world and among the Christians after they have assimilated Arabic learning. The so-called 

Liber de causis, elements of the Corpus Areopagiticum, and, ultimately, works of Proclus, 

propagate this in the Latin world where it mixed well with what it received from Aristotle to 

produce the philosophical underpinnings of the Christian systems of Albertus Magnus, Aquinas, Eckhart and Cusa to mention a few prominent adherents. In fact I shall be talking about this at 

Princeton early next month.10

III. A LIST OF CONVERGENCES

Besides the obedience to the Delphic Gnothi seauton in Platonic philosophical religion, or philosophy 

as religion, I give a few details of nine doctrines where what is taught in the Abrahamic religions has a 

basis, or correspondence, in texts of Plato: the perfect goodness of God, God as the identity of being 

and thinking, God as beyond being and thinking, true human and cosmic life as conversion, invisible

virtue as the important reality of the self, the immortality of the soul, God is the Creator, and the 

universal and particular providence of God. Some of these teachings are found directly in the 

dialogues of Plato, even some thought by many as belonging to the Abrahamic religions as opposed to 

philosophy (for example, the universal and particular providence of God), some are constructed by 

interpreting one or more texts from the dialogues through others (e.g. God as the unknowable One 

Non-Being), at least one, God as the being which is self-thinking, is usually supposed to be a criticism 

of Plato’s own teaching.

The Platonic Gnothi seauton, see above 

1. God as perfect good. Republic II, 379b-381c: the goodness of god who can only do good, 

perfection, and consequent changelessness  of god; the divine incorporality and 

incapacity to deceive follow from this. Aristotle’s Physics leads to the immutability and 

incorporality of God and Plato’s arguments are combined with it or presupposed by the 

theologians of the Abrahamic religions. Philo considers God to be actuality and incorporeal, 

understanding Genesis through the Timaeus, he establishes for his sillage that the creation is first 

incorporeal and then corporeal (the after was not temporal for him); Augustine guarantees that for 

many centuries this will be the common doctrine of Latin Christians. Philo also identifies the 

good maker of the Timaeus with the God of Genesis whose creation is good. Augustine’s 

Confessions is in large part a description of his philosophical journey to the idea of incorporeal 

substance, and thus to the incorporeal God and human soul as the conditions of Christian faith for 

him. At the crucial turning Plotinus is his guide. He maintains that what he came to laboriously 

was known to ordinary Christians. Maimonides is preoccupied with establishing the divine 

incorporality and laboriously retrieves the Aristotelian arguments for this purpose. The first 

conclusion Aquinas draws from the divine name with which he begins, Simplicity, requires God’s 

incorporality. Perfection comes next. These theologians know that their Scriptures seem to 

contradict divine incorporality and perfection and interpret them allegorically to establish it as 

essential to religion. 

2. God as Pure Being, the identity of being and thinking. Republic V, 476e: the equation of 

being, identity, stability, and knowability, intellect apprehends the forms. While the Gnothi 

seauton descends from the Delphic Oracle to the Abrahamic religions via Plato, in this case, Plato 

transmits, as Aristotle indicates in Metaphysics I.6, the philosophy and the divinity of Parmenides. The Way of Truth leads to the predication of being with itself and the meeting in the same of 

being and thinking. God’s answer to Moses at the Burning Bush is translated into the language of 

Greek metaphysics in the Septuaginta (LXX) [the translation of the Hebrew scripture into Greek 

made by Jews 200 years before the Common Era and fundamental to the convergence wrought by 

Philo and Christian theologians]. The “I am who am” [ in Greek (einai, “to be”)] becomes 

one with the answer of the goddess in the poem of Parmenides for Hellenized Jews and Christians. 

The author of the Book of Revelation assists in this convergence when Jesus calls himself "the 

being" ( ), thus identifying himself with the “I am who am” of Exodus 3.14 (Revelation 1.4). 

What truly is is also the self-complete thinking. Augustine is in the tradition of these 

identifications, conveyed to him by Plotinus and Porphyry as well as by others. NOUS, translated 

as “Mind” or “Intellectual Principle”, is the second level of divinity or spiritual Hypostasis for 

Plotinus, and the highest for his disciple Porphyry, both of whom influenced Augustine on the 

nature of God. Plotinus writes at 5.1.4 “Intellectual-Principle by its intellective act establishes 

Being, which in turn, as the object of intellection, becomes the cause of intellection and of 

existence to the Intellectual-Principle” For Augustine God’s name is idipsum esse, the true to be. 

Confessions 7.10.16 “And I said, ‘Is Truth, therefore, nothing, because it is not diffused through 

space – neither finite nor infinite?’ And thou didst cry to me from afar, ‘I am that I am.’ Augustine 

gives authority for Latin Christians not only to a theological ontology erected on this basis but also 

to a NOUS mysticism. Philo had already used Plato’s language about ecstasy “sober intoxication” 

to describe LOGOS mysticism. 

When, in Aristotle, the forms of Plato become ideas thought by minds, the equation 

results in the Primary Substance, or God, as Self-thinking Thought and Pure Being. In Aristotle’s 

Metaphysics XII.7 we find: 

“And thinking in itself deals with that which is best in itself, and that which is thinking in the

fullest sense with that which is best in the fullest sense. And thought thinks on itself because it 

shares the nature of the object of thought; … The act of contemplation is what is most pleasant 

and best. … And life also belongs to God; for the actuality of thought is life, and God is that 

actuality; and God's self-dependent actuality is life most good and eternal. We say therefore that 

God is a living being, eternal, most good, so that life and duration continuous and eternal belong 

to God; for this is God.”

This is the idea of God for the Peripatetics. Islamic and Jewish philosophical theologians in the 

Peripatetic tradition, led by al-Farabi, like Ibn Sina (Avicenna), Ibn Rushd (Averroes) and Moses 

Maimonides, also represent God through this equation of being and knowing. Aquinas is in this 

tradition. 

In general, this identification of God and reason leads to philosophical religions of the kind treated 

by Carlos Fraenkel in Philosophical Religions from Plato to Spinoza: Reason, Religion, and 

Autonomy (Cambridge University Press, 2012). The result in al-Farabi is to produce the most 

complete identity of philosophical reason and religion in the history of the Abrahamic religions. 

3. God beyond Being and Thinking. Republic VI, 509b-c: the Good compared to the Sun is 

Beyond (, epekeina). It is the source of being and knowing but beyond (epekeina) both. 

Plotinus, by interpreting Plato’s Parmenides dialogue as the master text of philosophical theology, 

and identifying the Good of the Republic with its One Non-Being, is the founder of 

Neoplatonism of which this is the characteristic doctrine. Iamblichus and Proclus are also 

foundational theologians for this tradition and the mysticism of the One or Nothingness by Excess 

which goes with it. Indeed, the First Principle in the tradition of Iamblichus and Proclus, which 

may be beyond the One, is more inaccessible than that of Plotinus because humans never escape from being souls and therefore cannot achieve Plotinian henosis. In this respect, their position is 

closer to that of Islam where, as absolutely unique and exclusive, the One is entered only by

extinction. Judaism has a convergent direction so far as God is not nameable, is approached 

through darkness, and refuses Moses request for face to face sight. For Christians, see I Timothy

6.16, God dwells in light unapproachable whom no human hath seen nor can see, and Paul’s 

sermon on the Athenian Areopagus, Acts 17:22-34, where he preaches “the unknown God”. Paul 

had been converted in a blinding encounter with a heavenly light “beyond the brightness of the 

sun” (Acts 26.13). The profoundly and widely influential Christian mystical theologian Dionysius 

the Areopagite stresses this view of God. Dionysius derived his teaching from Paul and from Plato 

mediated by Philo Judaeus of Alexandria, Gregory of Nyssa, Plotinus, Iamblichus, and Proclus. 

Al-Ghazali is the most influential Islamic heir of this “Eastern” tradition and his teaching is taken 

up by Ibn Tufayl in Hayy Ibn Yaqzan. Crucially, for both al-Ghazali and Ibn Tufayl, the assent to 

the Beyond thought and being requires theurgic rituals (as understood by Iamblichus and Proclus) 

beyond philosophical theory. These Moslems take from the Sufis, who probably derived them 

from Eastern Christians. There is an ascent by way of light to its source. 

4. Conversion from darkness to light, from ignorance and non-being to knowledge, being and 

their source. Republic VII, 518c-d: the movement within and out of the cave, from darkness to light, 

from the non-being and ignorance which belongs to becoming, up to being and knowing and their 

source, the Good, is “to turn around” (strephein). A conversion is required (periakteon). This 

demands someone with the art (techne) of leading around (periagoges), who can convert 

(metastraphestai). Ultimately this requires that someone who has seen the light return to the dark to 

help the prisoners break their chains, turn around, move upwards and out. Religions, pagan, Jewish, 

Christian, Muslim have this idea and image at their centre and a converting saviour or saviours 

(Protagoras, Moses, Jesus, Mohammed). Probably the resulting soteriology (theory of the saviour or 

of salvation) is most completely worked out philosophically by Iamblichus (c250-c325 CE), but it 

is everywhere present in the itineraries (journeys) of the soul among the religions of the Book. Moses 

is the archetype of this figure for the Abrahamic religions, and, with Philo, is presented with this 

Platonic agagoge (guide for the ascent) in mind. Philo’s De Vita Mosis is an anagoge, as is The 

Guide of the Perplexed of Maimonides. Christ plays the role of the saviour guide for Christians, see, 

from among many possible examples, John 8:12, “I am the Light of the World” and the equation 

of the divine Word, life and light in John 1:1-5 on which we have Augustine’s equation with Platonic 

doctrine in Confessions, VII.ix (13). The conversion toward light is central to Islam and the great 

Islamic theologian, philosopher and mystic, al-Ghazali, wrote a great exposition of the journey in 

The Niche of Lights. Ibn Tufayl’s Hayy Ibn Yaqzan, at which we have just looked when considering 

the mysticism of the One, is another Islamic example. However, to get a sense of the total assimilation 

of Platonism and of Christianity, following it, to the logic of conversion, we must recollect that with 

Platonism it becomes ontological as well as psychological. All reality beneath the One – Good itself 

is structured by the mone [remaining], proodos [going out], epistrophe [return]. All is in the First, 

proceeds from it and returns, is converted, back towards its source when it achieves its proper good. 

Once this is gathered from Plotinus and Proclus, for example, then Christian doctrine (for example 

the Trinity) and literature is evidently replete with examples of this structure. Augustine’s 

Confessions, Boethius’ Consolatio, Eriugena’s Periphyseon, Anselm’s Proslogion, Aquinas’ Summa 

theologiae, Bonaventure‘s Itinerarium,and Richard Hooker’s Lawes of the Ecclesiastical Polity, Book 

One are outstanding instances. There are verbal references back to Plato’s description of the prisoners 

at the bottom of the Cave in Augustine’s Confessions (Books 3 & 4), Boethius’ Consolatio (Book 

1), Anselm’s Proslogion (cap. 1), and Bonaventure’s Itinerarium (Book 1), but only Boethius is 

likely to have known whose language he was reproducing—and he most certainly did know! 5. The Goal: likeness to God. From Carlos Fraenkel, Philosophical Religions from Plato to 

Spinoza: Reason, Religion, and Autonomy, 123-124: The foundational Christian theologians 

“Clement and Origen agree with [the Jewish theologian] Philo that being created in God’s “image” 

and “likeness” means that human reason is an image and likeness of divine Reason which, in turn, 

is an image and likeness of God. For them, of course, human reason is also an image and likeness 

of Christ. Since they take “image” to refer to reason’s potential and “likeness” to the realization of 

this potential, they can connect Genesis 1:26 to the telos formula of the Theaetetus [(176a–b)] –

“to become like God as much as possible.” The goal is to move from “image” to “likeness” 

(Strom. 2.22, 131, 6; De princ.3.6, 1). The Christian ideal, then, like the Platonic ideal, is a life 

ordered by reason towards the perfection of reason. Indeed, everyone who follows the prescriptions 

of reason by the same token follows Christ’s prescriptions and with every true insight increases his

share in Christ.” Deiformity, likeness to God, is the goal of the Neoplatonic philosophers and 

their Jewish, Islamic and Christian heirs. 

6. The human self. Soul and its unseen internal justice is important, not externally visible 

rewards. Republic II, 366e. The physical ugliness and inward beauty of Socrates make him a 

paradigm. The soul is immortal and we ought to make our choices in this life relative to its future. 

Its present and future happiness depend upon its being just. This justice as internal and external 

order is taken up in the Hellenic philosophy and the Abrahamic religions. Beginning with Plato we 

pass by way of the Septuagint to the merging of Greek and Hebrew which comes down to Paul, 

Augustine, and Anselm. I conclude with al Farabi’s system which mixes elements from Plato, 

Aristotle, the Neoplatonists and Peripatetics to found a universal community based on justice in 

God, the cosmos, the human soul, the relation of soul and body and in the political ruled by the 

Philosopher-king-Imam. 

7. Immortality of the Soul. For Plato the soul is immortal, Republic X, 608c-613e. Aristotle 

and his followers, the Peripatetics, are at best ambiguous on the inherent immortality of the 

individual soul, but do prescribe a way for the human to become immortal by contemplation and 

absorption into the divine thinking. This path many Islamic and Jewish philosophical theologians 

follow. Indeed, Philo seems to propose it. Many pagan philosophers follow Plato in teaching the 

transmigration of souls, a notion usually strongly rejected in the Abrahamic religions. No 

convergence is more difficult to map than this one. Since the time of the encounter of Hellenism 

and Israel during the Maccabees, the doctrine of the resurrection has been either an alternative to, 

or a form of, or conformed to, or absolutely opposed to the Platonic and Aristotelian versions of 

human immortality. With the Pharisees and Rabbinic Judaism, with Christianity, and Islam, the 

resurrection became, along with monotheism, the central doctrines. The problems are indicated by 

the fact that Maimonides makes belief in the resurrection an article of Jewish faith, as it was of the 

Islamic , but clearly teaches Aristotelian assimilation to divine intellect by contemplation, and is 

accused of being an infidel by his fellow Jews on the resurrection. Augustine and his followers until 

the 13th century follow Plato. Aquinas moves to an Aristotelian idea of soul and body incompatible 

with Augustine but interprets Aristotle by way of the Neoplatonists to preserve individual 

immortality.

8. Creation: With Plato we have the first philosopher who maintained that the world was 

created by an intelligent cause and who declared that this order was established by a divine being 

also occupied with the moral destiny of mankind. His Timaeus teaches literally that time begins 

with the creation of the sensible world, which is “the moving image of eternity”; it is sustained 

only by the will of the creator God that it continue forever so as to be as good as possible, i.e. as 

nearly eternal as possible. Philosophers and theologians in late Antiquity who knew both the account in the book of Genesis and Plato’s found them so close that they supposed the one had 

been borrowed from the other or that both had the same source in the divine truth. Beginning with 

Philo, Jews, Christians, and Muslims understood their revealed texts through Plato’s philosophical 

story. Later pagan philosophers reconciled Plato’s Demiurge (creator) with Aristotle’s Unmoved 

Mover, so that both philosophers were supposed to have taught that God created all things from 

nothing (i.e. there was no other first cause), and Christian, Islamic, and Jewish philosophical 

theologians (e.g. Thomas Aquinas) followed them on this. By the end of his teaching, Aquinas, 

balancing almost all the elements of the Hellenic tradition along with the now supposedly 

Scriptural notion of a temporal beginning of the creation (e.g. Philo and many of the Arabic 

philosophers did not hold this, to say nothing of John 1.1), held that Plato and Aristotle agreed on 

the creation of the world from nothing, although he faulted Aristotle for holding that the world 

was eternal. 

9. Providence: According to Plato “the gods perceive, see, and hear everything, nothing is 

able to escape them which falls within sense or knowledge” (Laws X, 901d) and these gods “are 

more, not less, careful for small things than for great” (Laws X, 900d). The Neoplatonic 

philosophers and Christian philosophical theologians follow Plato on this. Aristotle and his 

followers, the Peripatetics, are at best ambiguous whether God exercises a care for particulars and 

some Islamic and Jewish philosophical theologians follow them instead of Plato. I use Boethius’ 

Consolation of Philosophy which borrows a great part of its teaching on providence from 

Plotinus, Iamblichus and Proclus to give the common position of philosophical Hellenes and 

Christians in late Antiquity on providence and fate and conclude with a passage from Moses 

Maimonides which stands in the Peripatetic tradition but which stands with Boethius in finding an 

escape from fate and a safety in God’s providence through intellect.11

10. The Need for a Mediator: The Need for a Mediator and the Fate of Socrates as the 

Intermediator 

Republic VII, “And consider this also,” said I, “if such a one should go down again and take his 

old place would he not get his eyes full1 of darkness, thus suddenly coming out of the sunlight?” 

“He would indeed.” “Now if he should be required to contend with these perpetual prisoners 

[517a] in 'evaluating' these shadows while his vision was still dim and before his eyes were 

accustomed to the dark—and this time required for habituation would not be very short—would 

he not provoke laughter, [as Socrates did] and would it not be said of him that he had returned 

from his journey aloft with his eyes ruined and that it was not worth while even to attempt the 

ascent? And if it were possible to lay hands on and to kill the man who tried to release them and 

lead them up, would they not kill him?” [as Socrates was] “They certainly would,” he said….

“Observe, then, Glaucon,” said I, “that we shall not be wronging, either, the philosophers who arise

among us, but that we can justify our action when we constrain them to take charge of the other 

citizens and be their guardians. …You have received a better [520c] and more complete education

than the others, and you are more capable of sharing both ways of life. Down you must go then,

each in his turn, to the habitation of the others and accustom yourselves to the observation of the 

obscure things there. For once habituated you will discern them infinitely better than the dwellers there, and you will know what each of the ‘idols’ is and whereof it is a semblance, because you have 

seen the reality of the beautiful, the just and the good. So our city will be governed by us and you

with waking minds, and not, as most cities now which are inhabited and ruled darkly as in a dream 

by men who fight one another [520d] for shadows and wrangle for office as if that were a great 

good, when the truth is that the city in which those who are to rule are least eager to hold office

must needs be best administered and most free from dissension, and the state that gets the contrary 

type of ruler will be the opposite of this.” “By all means,” he said. “Will our alumni, then, disobey 

us when we tell them this, and will they refuse to share in the labors of state each in his turn while 

permitted to dwell the most of the time with one another in that purer world 

520e] “Impossible,” he said: “for we shall be imposing just commands on men who are just. Yet 

they will assuredly approach office as an unavoidable necessity,and in the opposite temper from 

that of the present rulers in our cities.”

Crucial texts are those written by the most important figure for the convergence of Hellenism and 

the Abrahamic religions, Philo Judaeus of Alexandria. With Philo the human participation in the 

divine at the heart of the Platonic-Aristotelian tradition is mediated through the divine-human

monad of Moses. 

De Vita Mosis, On the Life of Moses I : Moses as Monad, God, King, Paradigm, Mystic and 

Mediator: “What more shall I say? Has he not also enjoyed an even greater communion with the 

Father and Creator of the universe, being thought worthy of being called by the same appellation? 

 For he also was called the god and king (θέος ɈȽί ȾȽςɇɉɂυς) of the whole nation, and he is said 

to have entered into the darkness where God was; that is to say, into the invisible, and shapeless, 

and incorporeal world, the archetypal substance of all beings, where he beheld things unseen by 

mortal nature; for, having brought himself and his own life into the middle [between the divine 

and the human], as an excellently wrought picture, he established himself and his own life as a 

most beautiful and Godlike work, to be a paradigm for all those who were willing to imitate it. 

When he is about to die, the Father changes Moses from “a double being, composed of soul and 

body, so that his whole nature is that of a monad [ɊοɋáɁος] without elements, thus transforming 

him wholly and entirely into a most sun-like mind” (Mos. II.288).

Philosopher-King, priest and prophet in the sillage of Plato’s ideal ruler, this Moses is the model 

on which the Christian Emperor, and the constitution of the Christianised Roman Empire, will be 

authoritatively imagined by Eusebius and, I think though cannot prove, the Philosopher-King-

Imam will be formed by al-Farabi. Certainly Philo’s unification of the offices is important for the 

Christian understanding of what the Christ is. Philo’s Moses is mediator, or creator, within 

Platonism, of what will much later be called mystical union. The assimilation of Philo’s Moses to 

the divine LOGOS, and his becoming paradigmatic thereby, are certainly transmitted to Dionysius 

the Areopagite by way of Gregory of Nyssa with immeasurably huge influence for the Christian 

Platonist tradition of the God beyond Being. 

The ascent of Philo’s Moses into the darkness at the top of the mountain may also be an 

important moment in noetic, or intellectual, mysticism, such as that of Augustine, in the alternative 

Platonic-Aristotelian theological tradition, the God which is pure Being identical with Thinking. 

D. CONCLUSION

Many other convergences are there to be investigated: trinitarian structures of divinity, the relation, 

if any, between the Iamblichean / Proclean soul vehicle and the development of the doctrine of the 

resurrection body, Christian and Neoplatonic incarnation and sacraments (to speak loosely) in the 

wake of Iamblichus, hierarchies of spiritual beings, continuities in the veneration of holy places and 

heroes, sacred music. Some of these concern the distinctively Christian doctrines of Trinity and Incarnation which cannot be thought apart from Platonism (in the broad sense I have used it here). 

The ones I have treated are the most obvious and are ones which cross the religious boundaries. 

Owing to the language of its Scriptures, Christianity is the most completely Greek of the 

three Abrahamic religions, but all are thoroughly Hellenic (whether or not “Hellenized”). There 

have been, and perhaps still are, many reasons this fact has been used as an accusation. One 

scholarly reality has made throwing “Platonic” as a term of abuse more difficult. When it is taken 

in the widest sense to include its Neoplatonic developments, especially those which emerge with 

Iamblichus, most of the old accusations fall away. Its deity is not static, it is not fundamentally 

dualistic, or matter and body hating, and it is not a rationalism which submits the divine mystery 

to human conceptualizing. In fact, the Hellenic constitutes a common ground on which the three 

Abrahamic religions meet and through which they share a connection to the sources of our 

sciences, political structures, and our arts and letters. Not a bad thing to acknowledge and explore. 

********************* 

EXCURSUS 

Robert Crouse on GREEK BLENDED WITH HEBREW

From “Memoria, Intellectus, Voluntas: the Augustinian Centre of Robert Crouse’s 

Scholarly Work”, Dionysius30 (2012): 42–76 at 45–50. 

I cannot move forward from the first decade of Robert’s work without a word about the 

article which came out of his Master of Theology thesis written under Eugene Fairweather at 

Trinity: “The Augustinian Background of St. Anselm’s Concept of Justitia.” In it, he defines St. 

Anselm’s concept of Justitia as “universal rectitude of order”12 and traces it back to not only to 

Augustine but also to the pagan Greeks and to the Hebrews, as well as to their ancient 

concordance. I cannot give his whole argument here, but a suggestion of its character will appear 

from its first words: “The Greek idea of justice (dikē) was initially a religious idea.”13

After outlining the form it takes in the Hellenic poets and philosophers, Robert goes on to 

assert that “For the Hebrews, the concept of the justice of God was central”, but this does not set 

the Scriptures in opposition to the Greek and Roman poets and philosophers, just the contrary. 

Crucially for him, when the “seventy-two elders” (to whom tradition attributes the Septuagint) 

translated the Hebrew term for justice, “they chose the Greek term dikē and its derivatives.”14 In 

consequence: 

For all those who read these writings in Greek, the ideas associated with the Greek term 

would inevitably be blended with the Hebrew concept. Philo Judaeus, writing some 

centuries later from the same Alexandrian background, shows how effectively these ideas 

could be blended by a philosophically minded Jew. St. Paul, who was familiar with both 

the Hebrew and the Greek of the Scriptures, chose the same Greek word (dikaisunē) to 

express the justice of God, a central idea in his theology, both as an attribute of God, and 

as a quality in man caused by God.15
For Robert, the Church Fathers, building on the methods and doctrines of Philo, simply continued 

the blending of Hellenic and Hebrew which they found in Scripture and “accepted the full 

implications of both Biblical and philosophical usage.”16 One of these was that justice, as both 

justification and sanctification—to use the technical language of Christian theology—, was, for 

them and for Robert, simultaneously an attribute of God imputed to the just and also really 

possessed by them. He never varied either from this teaching or from its being an implication of 

the unity of revealed theology with philosophy.17

Robert’s publishing in the 1960s began with an essay on the hellenization of Christianity, 

that is on the criticism of Christianity as fatally infected by pagan Hellenism—the criticism is 

implied in the characterisation. In it he identified the origins and modern history of how the 

elements, which he, part of the Jewish and Christian Scriptures, the Christian Fathers, and the

mediaeval doctors, had blended together, came to be set against each other. This opposition 

ultimately put Christianity at war with its own doctrinal, sacramental and institutional traditions 

and structures. He determined that “the possibility of systematic and critical discussion of this 

problem, and the use of the concept of hellenization as a fundamental theme in the explication of 

the history of dogma, depended on the circumstances of the Reformation.”18 Prior to it such an 

extensive criticism of theological tradition as the concept of hellenization implied seemed 

impossible….As in the case of biblical criticism, so too in the case of the history of 

dogma, the sacred character of Christian doctrine, hallowed by centuries of tradition, made 

such an enterprise seem impious.19

After tracing the impious enterprise from the 16th century through to Harnack and the 1950s, 

Robert concluded with words defending the unification he had discerned as requisite to Anselm’s 

Augustinian concept of Justitia. The statement also gives the most general principles of his 

scholarly programme and the structure he will discern in the divine forms, reasons, or words he 

would continue to study, as well as the texts he would explicate: 

While schematizations of contrasts between Hebrew and Greek modes of thought and 

expression are useful, it is dangerous…to regard them as in any sense absolute….To say 

that Greek thought about God is static, for instance, is untrue; for the Greeks, God is full 

of active power. And it is similarly wrong to suppose that the Hebrews have no concept of 

the being of God. The real distinctions here, as elsewhere, are rather a matter of emphasis 

on different aspects of the same concept. Thus…Hebrew and Greek ways of thinking 

should be regarded as complementary rather than opposed. It is perhaps along such lines as 

these that there is now promise of some solution…. Perhaps it is no longer necessary to think of hellenization in terms of deterioration….[T]he hellenization of Christianity is 

implicit in the historicity of Christianity itself—in the enfleshment of revelation…20

October 9, 2013 

 

20 Ibid.: 33.
