The Harrowing of Hell

salvation for the dead in early christianity

David L. Paulsen, Roger D. Cook, and Kendel J. Christensen1

Lord, are there few that be saved?”

(Luke 13:23). This question has troubled 

thinkers from Christianity’s beginning. 

The faithful readily accept that, save Jesus Christ, 

there is “none other name under heaven given 

among men, whereby we must be saved” (Acts 4:12). 

Yet, the same loyal followers of Christ wrestle with 

the puzzling reality that countless numbers of souls 

have lived and died never having heard of Jesus 

Christ, let alone having had an adequate chance 

to accept the salvation he offers. What is their fate 

in the eternities? Are these forever excluded from 

salvation? Thomas Morris, philosophy professor at 

Notre Dame, describes this unexplained “scandal” 

in his book The Logic of God Incarnate:

The scandal . . . arises with a simple set of questions asked of the 

Christian theologian who claims that it is only through the life and 

death of God incarnated in Jesus Christ that all can be saved and 

reconciled to God: How can the many humans who lived and died 

before the time of Christ be saved through him? They surely can-

not be held accountable for responding appropriately to something 

of which they could have no knowledge. Furthermore, what about 

all the people who have lived since the time of Christ in cultures 

with different religious traditions, untouched by the Christian 

gospel? . . . How could a just God set up a particular condition of 

salvation, the highest end of human life possible, which was and is 

inaccessible to most people? Is not the love of God better under-

stood as universal, rather than as limited to a mediation through 

the one particular individual, Jesus of Nazareth? Is it not a moral 

as well as a religious scandal to claim otherwise?2

This “scandal,” otherwise known as the soterio-

logical problem of evil, is the logical incoherence of 

the Christian triad of ideas that (1) God is perfectly 

loving and just and desires that all his children be 

saved, (2) salvation comes only through an indi-

vidual’s acceptance of Christ’s salvific gifts, and 

(3) countless numbers of God’s children have died 

without having a chance to hear about, much less 

accept, those saving gifts. Would a truly loving and 

just God condemn his children simply because they 

had never heard of his Son? Some very influential 

Christian thinkers have answered in the affirma-

tive,3

 and, consequently, some critics have labeled 

Christianity as a religion of damnation rather than 

salvation.4

This pessimistic position has not always pre-

vailed in Christianity.5

 Indeed, in early Christian 

thought, as well as in apocalyptic Judaism that 

preceded it, the merciful doctrine of salvation for 

the dead, known to early Christians as the “har-

rowing” of hell,6

 was advanced as the divine solu-

tion to the problem. In this paper, which is the first 

of a three-part series, we (1) trace the origin and 

development of this idea in early Christianity and 

its formal articulation in the Apostles’ Creed; (2) set 

forth the rejection of the doctrine, first by Augus-

tine and later by the Reformers, and their reasons 

for rejecting it; and (3) conclude with a brief survey 

of some contemporary solutions to the soteriologi-

cal problem of evil. In the sequels to this paper, we 

explore the doctrine of baptism for the dead in early 

Christianity and elaborate on the restoration of the 

doctrines of the harrowing of hell and baptism for 

the dead in modern revelation. 

Christian Precursors of Postmortem Rescue 

of the Dead

The writers of the New Testament texts are 

often described by contemporary Near Eastern 

scholars as Jewish or apocalyptic Christians to dif-

ferentiate them from classical Christians, who 

appear in the second century ad and whose views 

begin to prevail from that time on. They were part 

of what scholars now call Second Temple Judaism, 

or Judaism as it existed from the return of the exiles 

from Babylon to the destruction of the Jerusalem 

temple by the Romans (516 bc–ad 70). Their writ-

ings have a heavenly focus, describing in detail 

multiple, storied heavens and the ranks of angels 

that reside in each; the fall of some of those angels 

and their introducing evil to the earth; and the 

apocalyptic ascent of chosen prophets and priests 

to the highest heaven to witness and participate 

in the proceedings of the divine council of God. 

In addition, their writings also detail the coming 

destruction of the world and the paradise that God 

will establish, the resurrection of the dead and their 

exaltation in the hereafter, and the fiery, eternal 

punishment that the wicked will suffer for sins 

committed in mortality.7

 As a direct descendant of 

apocalyptic Judaism and its unique views,8

 early 

Christianity took an avid interest in the final condi-

tion of the dead and in reconciling this final state of 

affairs with God’s justice. 

In the apocalyptic Jewish tradition, of which 

the New Testament writers who inaugurate the 

apocalyptic Christian tradition are a part, God is 

unequivocally understood to be a transcendent, all-

powerful, embodied being who seeks the advance-

ment of all mankind. He is otherworldly in that he 

physically resides in the Holy of Holies of the heav-

enly temple located in the highest heaven, but his 

transcendence should not be confused with being 

exterior to the universe, for he fully exists within 

space and time.9

 From his exalted throne he con-

trols the universe, his unmatched power extending 

to each and every corner and affecting all that dwell 

therein.10 Acting on behalf of his children, he shows 

them abundant mercy and love balanced with jus-

tice as he also punishes those who have lived cor-

rupt lives in mortality.11

A theological impasse is created, however, when 

one attempts to reconcile the loving and merciful 

God of apocalyptic Judaism with the harsh, eter-

nal punishment of Sheol (Greek hades), even if its 

inhabitants merit some measure of retribution.In 

approximately 400 bc, Enochian Jews began writ-

ing the Book of Watchers, a portion of the larger text 

now known as 1 Enoch. These are the first apoca-

lyptic Jews to describe portions of Sheol as being a 

place of extreme punishment for the wicked. They 

describe the “scourges and tortures of the cursed 

forever” (1 Enoch 22:10) and the flaming “abyss” 

into which the fallen angels are thrown and burn 

forever (1 Enoch 21:1–10).12 Prior to this time, some 

expounders of Israelite religion understood that 

all mortals reside permanently in Sheol after this 

life, and it appears that their existence after this 

life could be good or bad, depending upon their conduct during mortality.13 But Enochian Jews treat 

a portion of Sheol as a temporary holding place 

for the spirits of the righteous departed, placing 

the righteous in a place of rest and light and the 

wicked in places of darkness and confinement, but 

not physical punishment.14 They also taught of the 

righteous leaving Sheol, their resurrection from the 

dead, and their subsequent existence in an Edenlike 

paradise (1 Enoch 22:1–14; 24:1–25:6). 

Although these ideas were commonplace in 

apocalyptic Judaism by the end of the Second Tem-

ple period, awareness of the theological dilemma 

created by the Enochian Jews’ view of Sheol’s 

eternal punishment also emerges in writings near 

the end of that period.15 Texts from the apocalyp-

tic Jewish tradition dated to the late first century 

bc or early first century ad draw attention to the 

soteriological problem as their authors attempt to 

reconcile the endless torment of the underworld 

with the existence of a loving and merciful God. 

The Book of Parables, generally considered an Eno-

chian work of the late first century bc or the first 

century ad, records that even the archangel Michael 

at first recoils at the “harshness of the judgment” of the fallen angels. He exclaims to Raphael, “Who 

is there who would not soften his heart over it, and 

. . . not be troubled by this word?” Michael finds 

some comfort knowing that the worst punishments 

are reserved for the fallen archangels alone: “for 

no angel or human will receive their lot” (1 Enoch

68:2–5). Still, the question remains: How can a lov-

ing and merciful God justify tormenting any of 

his creations, especially if this torment is “without 

end”? 

This dilemma is addressed in 4 Ezra, an apoca-

lyptic Jewish work dating to the first century ad. In 

the text, an angel shows the ancient prophet Ezra 

the “furnace of hell” where the disobedient are des-

tined to live after this life and the paradise and exal-

tation reserved for the righteous. He tells Ezra that 

the wicked will “wander about in torments,” while 

those who follow God will be “guarded by angels 

in profound quiet,” having bodies whose faces will 

“shine like the sun, and . . . be made like the light 

of the stars” (4 Ezra 7:36, 80, 95, 97)—a literal exal-

tation of the righteous to an angelic status.16 Ezra 

laments, however, that he cannot reconcile God’s 

overabundant goodness and mercy with what seems 

to be an overly rigorous justice. If all have sinned 

and become unclean, then how is it that any deserve 

salvation at all? How can the final judgment be just 

with its division of those entering paradise and 

those entering hell? Ezra ends his lament with a plea 

to God for mercy for the disobedient: 

What does it profit us that we shall be preserved 

alive but cruelly tormented? . . . And if we were 

not to come into judgment after death, perhaps 

it would have been better for us. . . . It would 

have been better if the earth had not produced 

Adam, or else, when it had produced him, had 

restrained him from sinning. For what good is 

it to all that they live in sorrow now and expect 

punishment after death? . . . For in truth there 

is no one among those who have been born who 

has not acted wickedly, and among those who 

have existed there is no one who has not trans-

gressed. For in this, O Lord, your righteousness 

and goodness will be declared, when you are 

merciful to those who have no store of good 

works. (4 Ezra 7:65–67, 69, 116–17; 8:35–36)

Additionally, it should be noted that a part of 

the soteriological problem of evil is at least some-

what mitigated in apocalyptic Judaism in that it 

does not consign righteous Gentiles to the punish-

ments of Sheol. The Enochian text known as Enoch’s 

Dream Visions, written approximately 164 bc dur-

ing the persecutions of the Jews under Antiochan 

rule, speaks of the eventual victory of righteous 

Judaism over the gentile nations and the building 

of a vast, new temple complex to replace Jerusalem 

and its temple. It is the first apocalyptic Jewish text 

that explains the full angelic exaltation of righteous 

Jews in the paradisiacal world that will be created 

on the earth, with the righteous being symboli-

cally described as “sheep” that are “white” and their 

wool “thick and pure,” a transformation from their 

previous mortal state, where they were plain sheep. 

Significantly, righteous Gentiles, symbolically 

described as the “animals on the earth and all the 

birds of heaven,” are subservient to the exalted Jews 

who reign over the earth from the temple complex, 

they “falling down and worshiping those sheep 

. . . and obeying them in every thing” (1 Enoch

90:28–32). Though still not granted the same status 

as righteous Jews, these Gentiles are not subject to 

the same fiery punishment that the fallen angels, 

wicked kings, and apostate Jews receive in Sheol 

(1 Enoch 90:20–27). 

This is significant because the righteous Gen-

tiles are not immediately consigned to eternal 

punishment; they apparently do not need to fear 

torment in Sheol. They continue to live on the earth, 

and they seemingly learn of and follow the God of 

the Jews, for he rejoices over them (1 Enoch 90:38). 

Indeed, a transformation is also available for them 

as the wild animals are “changed, and they all 

became white cattle” (1 Enoch 90:37), but it is also 

clear that their eternal status will be as everlast-

ing inferiors to the exalted Jews, for they are white 

cattle as compared to the brilliantly white sheep that 

rule over them.17 This partially, but not fully, solves 

part of the soteriological problem. A more complete 

resolution of the problem would demand that even 

the righteous Gentiles could be fully redeemed and 

exalted, the position that apocalyptic Christians 

would later adopt. 

Apocalyptic Christianity

Apocalyptic Christians, having inherited from 

apocalyptic Judaism the idea that the just are saved 

and the wicked condemned, were also troubled by this soteriological problem, but they advanced a 

unique solution during the first century ad: God 

will show an abundance of mercy by redeeming 

from Sheol all who can and will be saved. They 

affirm that Christ descended to the underworld as 

a divinely empowered spiritual being, smashed its 

gates, preached repentance to the captive disobedi-

ent, and began the salvific rites that would open for 

them the gates of heaven.18 So, apocalyptic Chris-

tians solved the soteriological problem by (1) con-

ceiving the punishment of those in Sheol as tempo-

rary and (2) conceiving God as offering repentance 

to the unevangelized and wicked of Sheol.19

Comments made by 

Paul the apostle show 

that salvation for the dead 

had been on the minds 

of apocalyptic Christians 

since its earliest days. The 

first reference is found 

in Paul’s letter to the 

Ephesians, likely written 

about ad 60.20 He refers 

to Jesus’s triumph over all 

things, even over “cap-

tivity” itself, and briefly 

describes Christ’s descent 

to hades: “He [Jesus] had 

also descended into the 

lower parts of the earth” 

(Ephesians 4:8–10 NRSV). 

Extant interpretations 

of this passage include 

Jesus’s victory over sin 

and his triumph over the captivity of hades. If Paul 

is referring to the latter, then by overcoming captiv-

ity Jesus freed the prisoners of the underworld.21

Indeed, Christ’s triumph over all things heavenly 

and earthly—elaborated in detail by Paul as the 

Father having lifted Jesus above all angelic “rule and 

authority and power and dominion” and “put all 

things under his [Jesus’s] feet” (Ephesians 1:21–22 

NRSV)—would not be complete unless Jesus also 

triumphed over the captivity of the underworld. 

If this interpretation is correct, then the fact that 

Jesus’s descent is mentioned without any additional 

comment implies that this is an idea familiar to 

Christianity’s formative years.22

Another apocalyptic Christian text written at 

about the same time as Paul’s letter to the Ephe-

sians, 1 Peter,23 gives additional insight into Christ’s 

redeeming the repentant captives of hades. In the 

passage quoted below, Peter explains that Christ was 

made “alive in the spirit,” presumably meaning that 

between his death and resurrection Jesus descended 

to hades and there opened the way for salvation of 

the dead. There he preached to those who had died 

in sin the hope that even disobedient spirits may be 

redeemed and returned to God:

For Christ also suffered for sins once for all, the 

righteous for the unrighteous, in order to bring 

you to God. He was put to death in the flesh, 

but made alive in the spirit, in which also he 

went and made a proclamation to the spirits in 

prison, who in former times did not obey, when 

God waited patiently in the days of Noah, dur-

ing the building of the ark, in which a few, that 

is, eight persons, were saved through water.24 . . . 

For this is the reason the gospel was proclaimed 

even to the dead, so that, though they had been 

judged in the flesh as everyone is judged, they 

might live in the spirit as God does. (1 Peter 

3:18–20; 4:6 NRSV)25
Peter seems to have a vindication of God’s jus-

tice in mind when writing these passages. If God did 

not arrange for Christ to proclaim the good news 

to the captives and allow those who could yet be 

redeemed to be freed, then his goodness would be 

suspect. A truly just and merciful God must give full 

opportunity for all to repent and live righteously, 

including the multitudes that died at the time of 

Noah. Despite their actions, God patiently waits for 

the spiritually dead to change so that he may grant 

them mercy, both now and in hades. It is not merely 

escape from Sheol but exaltation that Peter prom-

ises,26 for the captives are freed so that they might 

“live in the spirit as God does” (1 Peter 4:6). God 

is no respecter of persons according to Peter (see 

1 Peter 1:17), and he includes the deceased among 

those to whom God shows an abundance of mercy.

Given Peter’s stand on redeeming the dead, it 

should be no surprise to find that other apocalyptic 

Jews of the same time period attempted to solve the 

problem as well. A description of an opportunity 

for repentance for those in hades is found in the 

Apocalypse of Zephaniah, a work dating roughly to 

the first century ad and preserved by Christians.27

In it, the Old Testament prophet Zephaniah is given 

a tour of the multiple heavens28 and of hades, and 

he prays to God for compassion for those under-

going torment in the underworld (Apocalypse of 

Zephaniah 2:8–9). Later he sees a multitude of the 

exalted righteous, including Abraham, Isaac, and 

Jacob (Apocalypse of Zephaniah 8:1–9:5), who also 

pray to God for mercy for the inhabitants of hades 

(Apocalypse of Zephaniah 11:1–6). The sufferings 

of the underworld are deserved, according to the 

author, but the petitions of the exalted righteous are 

an appeal to God’s compassion, for he can choose to 

show mercy and forgive whom he will.29 Zephaniah 

also sees some inhabitants of hades who are blind 

and is told by his angelic escort that they are “cate-

chumens [one who receives instruction in prepara-

tion for baptism] who heard the word of God, but 

they were not perfected in the work which they 

heard.” Zephaniah asks, “Then do they not have 

repentance here?” with the angel replying, “Yes . . . 

until the day when the Lord will judge” (Apocalypse 

of Zephaniah 10:9–12). As the exalted righteous 

pray on behalf of all of the inhabitants of hades, it 

is understood that all—not just the catechumens—

have a possibility of either some sort of escape from 

hades or relief from its torments. However, the 

author does not explain when or how this redemp-

tion will take place. 

The book of Revelation, likely written in ad 96 

during the reign of the Roman Emperor Domitian, 

explains the release of the underworld’s captives 

as Christ having overcome death and opening up 

hades. Christ says to John that he is the “living one. 

I was dead, and see, I am alive forever and ever; and 

I have the keys of Death and of Hades” (Revela-

tion 1:18 NRSV). And at the great judgment, death 

and hades will give up “the dead that [are] in them, 

and all [will be] judged according to what they had 

done” (Revelation 20:13 NRSV).30 Then all those 

who have not turned to God, those whose names are 

not written in the book of life, will be thrown with 

death and hades into a lake of fire, identified as the 

“second death” (Revelation 20:11–15). Those who 

have fully turned toward God, however, now belong 

to Christ, the holder of the keys of death and hades. 

John, who adheres to a view of salvation similar to 

Peter and the author of the Apocalypse of Zephaniah, 

states that all who turn to God will be exalted.31

Another early Christian text provides convinc-

ing evidence for interpreting Ephesians, 1 Peter, and 

Revelation as portraying Christ’s descent to Sheol 

and freeing its captives. This text, known as the 

Odes of Solomon, is a collection of Christian hymns 

connected to the Johannine community of the late 

first or early second century ad.

32 In the text, the 

Christian author speaks as if he were Christ and 

describes Christ’s original descent from God and 

the highest heaven and his subsequent descent to 

Sheol: “He who caused me to descend from on high, 

and to ascend from the regions below” (Ode 22:1).33

He indicates that “I opened the doors which were 

closed” (Ode 17:9), followed by the claim that “I 

shattered the bars of iron, for my own iron(s) had 

grown hot and melted before me” (Ode 17:10). The 

shattering of the bars refers to Christ destroying 

the infamous gates of hades, and the melting of 

his binding chains caused by the fierce heat radiat-

ing from his fiery, divine glory that is once again 

revealed. The opening of the door is best explained 

as Christ allowing for vicarious baptism34 for the 

dead, baptism being the door to salvation for apoca-

lyptic Christians, rather than a further reference 

to the gates of the underworld, as that which is 

shattered need not be opened.35 Christ then states, 

“I went toward all my bondsmen in order to loose 

them, that I might not abandon anyone bound or binding” (Ode 17:12), revealing his intent to free the 

prisoners who belong to him. 

In Ode 42, Christ again details his descent to 

the underworld and his triumphant overcoming of 

death and Sheol. Christ is a departed spirit, so he 

descends to Sheol as do all departed spirits in the 

apocalyptic Jewish tradition.36 But the Son of God 

cannot be contained by either death or hell. His 

eternal nature repulses death, it being as “vinegar 

and bitterness” to death. Additional information 

about the shattering of the gates of hades is also 

revealed. It is Christ’s very appearance, the blind-

ing, divine light that streams from his face, which 

penetrates and overcomes Sheol, for the utter dark-

ness cannot withstand effulgent, celestial light. 

Christ shatters the gates, Sheol is breached, and the 

captives are set free:

Sheol saw me and was shattered, 

and Death ejected me and many with me.

I have been vinegar and bitterness to it, 

and I went down with it as far as its depth. 

(Ode 42:11–12)

Shattering Sheol is equivalent to the breach-

ing of an otherwise inescapable prison. The Book 

of the Watchers attempts to describe the spirit 

world, explaining that four immense, hollowed-

out chambers hold the spirits of the departed as 

they wait for the final judgment. One chamber, 

which is illuminated and has a fountain of water, 

is designated as the abode of the righteous. In this 

chamber the righteous spirits call upon God, with 

one petitioner described as “the spirit that went 

forth from Abel, whom Cain his brother murdered.” 

But even for the righteous, Sheol is impossible to 

escape, for the chambers are hewn out of “a great 

and high mountain of hard rock,” and the author 

describes the chambers as “deep” and their walls as 

“very smooth” to help his readers understand that 

one could never climb out of the abyss (1 Enoch

22:1–7). The world of the departed spirits, there-

fore, is divided between a place of reward and other 

places dedicated to confinement. The unrighteous 

dead in the Odes of Solomon are in a vast chamber 

reserved for the disobedient as they wait for the 

final judgment, but Christ’s opening of Sheol allows 

for release. 

Ode 42 next speaks of Christ’s spiritual body 

and his formation of a community of the righteous 

among the dead. The author explains that death 

could not long endure Christ’s blazing countenance, 

and it first releases his feet and then his head. Addi-

tionally, Christ has a face and speaks with lips. 

Clearly, the author holds that the departed Christ 

retains some kind of material embodiment, a spiri-

tual body, one with head, feet, lips, and a face, and 

others with a similar spiritual embodiment run 

to him and cry out for mercy. Theirs would be an 

inferior embodiment, however, for their faces do not 

shine with effulgent light, and they cannot effect 

their own release from Sheol.37 Christ then makes a 

proclamation to the departed spirits, offering them 

the eternal life of the righteous even as they stand in 

the world of the dead:

Then the feet and the head it released,38

because it was not able to endure my face.

And I made a congregation of living among his 

dead; 

and I spoke with them by living lips;

in order that my word may not fail. 

(Ode 42:13–14)

The response of the captives is a wholehearted 

turning to God. They cry out and plead for Christ’s 

pity and kindness. They have wallowed in the shad-

ows of Sheol, chained in an endless darkness that 

could never be lifted, but Christ, the Light,39 now 

brilliantly illuminates the most penetrating dark-

ness and offers them the promise of escape:

And those who had died ran toward me; 

and they cried out and said, “Son of God, have 

pity on us.

And deal with us according to your kindness, 

and bring us out from the chains of darkness.” 

(Ode 42:15–16)

In another possible reference to baptism for 

the dead, Ode 42 records that the departed spirits 

ask Jesus to open the door for them and for their 

salvation to be with the Savior. Their plea for an 

opening of the door indicates that this is a future 

event; therefore, like Ode 17:9 (above), it is not the 

shattered gates of Sheol that need to be opened, 

but an acknowledgment that they need the way 

opened for a vicarious baptism to take place. Note, 

in fact, that even though Christ now stands in 

their midst, they request the door to be opened so that they may “go forth to [him],” an indication 

that they are in some sense still separated from 

him; the gates of the heavens are still closed to 

them. Vicarious baptism will allow them to enter 

the Way,40 the Christian path to salvation, ending 

that separation. 

Interestingly, they do not desire salvation alone, 

meaning an entrance into one of the heavenly 

realms; they request that they be saved with Jesus, 

the appointed Savior. This is similar to the request 

of the apostles James and John 

that they may have the right to 

rule at Christ’s right and left 

hands, with Jesus explaining that 

the right to assign those thrones

of honor belongs to the Father 

(Mark 10:35–40). It also echoes 

Paul’s assertion that the righteous 

will be exalted over all angels 

to rule at Christ’s right hand.41

Indeed, in an earlier Ode, Christ 

proclaims, “upon my right hand 

I have set my elect ones” (Ode 

8:18). The dead who are being 

freed understand that to be saved 

by Jesus equates to being exalted 

with him:42

“And open for us the door

by which we may go forth to 

you,

for we perceive that our death 

does not approach you.

May we also be saved with you, 

because you are our Savior.” 

(Ode 42:17–18)

The final verses of Ode 42 

indicate that Christ will fulfill 

all their requests. He hears their 

pleas and responds to their sin-

cere faith by internalizing it. In a 

reference to the Christian rite of 

anointing or chrism,

43 by which 

the redeemed are made holy and 

heavenly, Christ then places his 

name on the foreheads of the ini-

tiates in the new community of 

the righteous by using olive oil.44

The chrism connects the initiates 

to Christ as they now perma-

nently bear the divine name that has been given 

to Christ by the Father.45 They now belong to him; 

indeed, Christ says, “they are mine”:

46

Then I heard their voice, 

and placed their faith in my heart.

And I placed my name upon their head,

because they are free and they are mine. 

(Ode 42:19–20)
The placement of the chrism on the fore-

heads of the departed spirits offers direct evidence 

that vicarious baptism will soon follow for them. 

Second-century ad Christian texts, the most impor-

tant being Syrian baptismal documents, indicate 

that chrism was directly related to baptism. The ini-

tiate would be presented for baptism, and he or she 

would be marked with oil on the forehead by the 

bishop or presbyter either in a prebaptismal or post-

baptismal anointing, or in anointings both before 

and after baptism. The chrisms, however, are not 

done independent of baptism—they are done at the 

same time. Syrian baptismal documents also record 

that a chrism for the entire body took place as part 

of the rite.47 Additionally, it can be argued that the 

chrism can be traced back to the first century and 

the very first Christians. Specifically referring to the 

chrism placed on the forehead, Gabriele Winkler 

connects the rite of anointing to the apostolic era:

Christian baptism is shaped after Christ’s 

baptism in the Jordan. As Jesus had received 

the anointing through the divine presence in 

the appearance of a dove, and was invested 

as the Messiah, so in Christian baptism every 

candidate is anointed and, in connection with 

the anointing, the gift of the Spirit is conferred. 

Therefore the main theme of this prebaptismal 

anointing is the entry into the eschatological 

kingship of the Messiah, being in the true sense 

of the word assimilated to the Messiah-King 

through this anointing.48

Given that the Christian author of the Odes 

would be familiar with both baptism and chrism 

and would understand that one accompanies the 

other, as well as the fact that he specifically refers 

to the chrism given to the repentant dead of Sheol, 

it can be reasonably concluded that the pleading of 

the repentant dead for Christ to open the door (Ode 

42:17) refers to the vicarious baptism of apocalyptic 

Christianity. They, like all Christians, will receive 

the rites necessary for entrance into God’s kingdom, 

but that process has begun in the world of spirits as 

they now bear his divine name. 

As a product of the Johannine Christian com-

munity of the late first or early second century ad, 

the Odes of Solomon serves as a strong indicator of 

the antiquity of the doctrine of the harrowing of 

hell. The scattered references found in Ephesians, 

1 Peter, and Revelation are enough to make a strong 

case that apocalyptic Christians understood that 

God will not torture the repentant for eternity, be 

these captives evangelized or not, but the explicit 

description of Christ’s descent and release of the 

captives seems to confirm this interpretation.

The apocalyptic Christian text commonly 

called the Epistula Apostolorum, or “Epistle to the 

Apostles,” also recounts the harrowing of hell. 

Dated to the early second century, the Christian 

author reports a dialogue between the resurrected 

Jesus and the disciples concerning Christ’s descent 

and rescue of the disobedient dead that lie chained 

in the darkness of Sheol.49 Christ claims that he 

will loosen their chains and bring them back to the 

light. Important is the fact that Jesus will accom-

plish what seems to be impossible by their release, 

for the wicked lie in utter despair with no hope 

for rescue. But as nothing is impossible to God, 

the empowered Christ will enter Sheol and deliver 

them. Note that the text also identifies Sheol as the 

place of Lazarus, implying that the world of spir-

its is divided into realms of places of punishment 

and reward. Apparently, the chambers dedicated 

to the righteous and the wicked will all be emptied 

through Christ’s ministrations:

Truly I say to you, that I have received all 

power from my Father that I may bring back 

those in darkness into light and those in corrupti-

bility into incorruptibility and those in death into 

life, and that those in captivity may be loosed,

as what is impossible on the part of men is pos-

sible on the part of the Father. I am the hope of 

the hopeless, the helper of those who have no 

helper, the treasure of those in need, the physi-

cian of the sick, the resurrection of the dead. . . . 

On that account I have descended to the place 

of Lazarus, and have preached to the righteous 

and to the prophets, that they may come forth 

from the rest which is below and go up to what 

is (above) . . . (; in that I stretch out) my right 

hand over them . . . [of the baptism (Eth.)] of life 

and forgiveness and deliverance from all evil, as 

I have done to you and to those who believe in 

me.50

Another such text is the Gospel of Bartholomew, 

or Questions of Bartholomew, as M. R. James says 

the manuscripts call it, which purports to be an exchange between the apostle Bartholomew and the 

resurrected Christ. Christ tells Bartholomew about 

his descent into hell, how the angels announce his 

coming, and how the devils react:

Then I went down into Hades that I might 

bring up Adam and all those who were with 

him, according to the supplication of Michael 

the archangel . . . 

And the angels cried to the powers saying, 

“Remove your gates, you princes, remove the 

everlasting doors for behold the King of glory 

comes down.” . . .

And when I had descended five hundred 

steps, Hades was troubled saying, “I hear the 

breathing of the Most High, and I cannot en-

dure it.” . . .

Then did I [Christ] enter in and scourged 

him [Hades] and bound him with chains that 

cannot be loosed, and brought forth thence all 

the patriarchs.51

In a similar text that was supposedly authored 

by Bartholomew and that James calls The Book 

of the Resurrection of Christ by Bartholomew the 

Apostle, James summarizes the harrowing of hell 

after Christ’s burial as follows: “Then Jesus rose 

and mounted into the chariot of the Cherubim. He 

wrought havoc in Hell, breaking the doors, binding 

the demons Beliar and Melkir and delivered Adam 

and the holy souls.”52

The Shepherd of Hermas, likely dating from the 

early to mid-second century ad, is another apoca-

lyptic Christian text that further describes the res-

cue of the dead from hades. Like the Odes of Solo-

mon, the author of the portion of the text known 

as the Parables indicates that a vicarious baptism is 

given to the repentant dead: 

It was necessary . . . for them to come up 

through water in order to be made alive, for 

otherwise they could not enter the kingdom of 

God, unless they laid aside the deadness of their 

former life. So even those who had fallen asleep 

received the seal of the Son of God and entered 

the kingdom of God. . . . The seal, therefore, is 

the water; so they go down into the water dead 

and they come up alive. (Shepherd of Hermas, 

Parable 9.16.2–4)53

Righteous Christians who have passed on par-

ticipate in rescuing the dead: “when these apostles 

and teachers who preached the name of the Son of 

God fell asleep . . . they preached also to those who 

had previously fallen asleep, and they themselves 

gave them the seal of the preaching” (Shepherd of 

Hermas, Parable 9.16.5). Additional instances of this 

rite’s performance include a group in Asia Minor 

who baptized the living using the names of the 

dead,54 as well as the Marcionites who would ask an 

already baptized, living follower a baptismal ques-

tion in behalf of a departed and then baptize that 

follower, with “the benefits accruing to the dead 

person.”55

In sum, apocalyptic Christianity inherited the 

soteriological problem of evil from apocalyptic 

Judaism, but in its formative years set out to find 

a solution to the problem, which is that God per-

sonally sent his Son to redeem mankind, with an 

overabundance of mercy offered so that even the 

repentant wicked who have passed on are offered 

salvation. And unlike other versions of apocalyptic 

Judaism, there is no distinction in these early Chris-

tian texts between the level of salvation offered to 

Jews and the unevangelized. All are freely offered 

redemption upon accepting Christ. The result is that 

the soteriological problem of evil and suffering is 

greatly mitigated. 

The Apostles’ Creed

These themes from Peter and apocalyptic Juda-

ism are echoed in the Apostles’ Creed, which is the 

oldest Christian creed56 and is still used today as 

part of the baptismal liturgy of the Roman Catholic, 

Anglican, and Lutheran churches.57 The Apostles’ 

Creed acknowledges a belief in “God, the Father 

almighty” and in “Jesus Christ, his only Son” who 

“descended into Hell.”58 This latter phrase is central 

to untangling the soteriological knot, for with it 

comes the possibility of evangelizing those who had 

passed from mortality. Indeed, this was the very 

purpose of its insertion, as one scholar illuminates: 

This article expresses the faith of the primi-

tive Church in two beliefs: First, it meant that 

God had not left anyone without the chance of 

salvation but had sent Jesus into hell in order to 

save those who had not known him on earth. 

The article was inserted in the Creed because the Creed is a brief outline of the saving acts of 

Christ, and the descent into hell is an impor-

tant part of his saving work. It is important to 

remember that hell to the early Church was not 

the ghastly place of torment it was to become in 

the mind of the medieval Church.59

Rather, the abode for departed spirits was known as 

a “resting place . . . until Jesus came.”60

Consider how the Apostles’ Creed has influ-

enced contemporary Catholic thought. According to 

one Catholic writer, the doctrine of the descent into 

hell involves a place of four divisions: 

Hell as a whole may be differentiated into at 

least three species: gehenna, purgatory, and 

sheol; according to a long-standing theologi-

cal view, there is also a limbo (from the Latin 

limbus, meaning edge or threshold) for unbap-

tized children, the limbus puerorum. Although 

it may sound strange to the contemporary ear, 

one can use the generic name in reference to 

each species: the hell of the damned (gehenna), 

the hell of purification (purgatory), the hell of 

the Fathers (sheol), and the hell of the children. 

Though these four abodes of the dead are very 

different in character, hell in all these cases can 

be represented with the generic Latin neuter, 

infernum.

61

The Limbo of the Father, where “all the holy men 

and women who died before the death of Christ” 

rest, “ceased to exist after Christ’s descent.”62 It was 

these who Christ descended to rescue: “Jesus did 

not descend into hell to deliver the damned, nor to 

destroy the hell of damnation, but to free the just 

who had gone before him.”63 The Limbo of the Chil-

dren, however, “remains a topic of unresolved theo-

logical understanding.”64

According to popular legend, the Creed was 

originally dictated from the Twelve Apostles them-

selves, though researchers trace the origin to confes-

sions of faith in early baptismal rites.65 Researchers 

do not know the precise authorship and occasion 

of its writing, only that it likely originated out of 

Rome between ad 150–75, when there was “every 

reason for the formation of some creedal statement 

to guard against the misconceptions of Christian-

ity which were widely prevalent and were causing 

serious trouble.”66 It thus came to be known as the 

“Rule of Faith” and was used as a check against 

heretical interpretations of the scriptures.67

Yet despite heresy, “there was no more well-

known and popular belief . . . and its popularity 

steadily increased.”68 Irenaeus, writing near the 

end of the second century, strongly confirmed 

the doctrine of the descent, teaching that Christ 

“descended into the lower parts of the earth to 

seek the sheep that was lost,” a clear indication of 

the salvific nature of his visit there.69 In Irenaeus’s 

mind, “a strict theodicy demanded that those who 

lived before . . . should share in the Gospel.”70 Clem-

ent of Alexandria (ca. 150–215) agrees, stating that 

“it is not right to condemn some without trial, and 

only give credit for righteousness to others who 

lived after the coming of the Lord.”71 Emphasizing 

even more clearly the evangelic purpose of Christ’s 

descent, Clement further states that “Christ went 

down to Hades for no other purpose than to preach 

the gospel.”72

Origen (ca. 185–254) taught that Christ visited 

and preached to the dead: “When he was in the 

body he convinced not merely a few . . . and that 

when he became a soul unclothed by a body he con-

versed with souls unclothed by bodies, converting 

also those of them who were willing to accept him 

or those who, for reasons which he himself knew, 

he saw to be ready to do so.”73 Origen defended this 

idea against Celsus, who argued that the descent 

was mere mythology.74

The Creed was still used widely and consid-

ered authoritative in the fourth and fifth centuries. 

Tyrannius (ca. 400), who translated many of Ori-

gen’s works into Latin, wrote a full, original com-

mentary on the Creed in which he notes that one 

of the apostles’ main intents for writing the Creed 

was for “future preaching . . . [and to be] handed 

out as standard teaching to converts.”75 He also 

acknowledges that there are some variations of the 

Creed circulating among the various churches, 

some without the phrase “descended into hell.” 

Tyrannius comments, however, that “the fact that 

He descended to hell is unmistakeabl[e]”; he cites 

scriptures confirming the idea76 and affirms that 

Christ descended for the purpose of preaching to 

and redeeming the souls in hell.77

Many other church authorities confirm the 

doctrine of the Creed that Christ descended into 

hell. Cyril of Jerusalem (ca. 315–86) affirms that 

Christ “descended . . . beneath the earth, that from thence also He might redeem the just.”78 Ambrose 

(d. 397) wrote that the “substance” of Christ visited 

the underworld to “set free the souls of the dead, 

to loose the bonds of death,” and to “remit sins.”79

Cyril of Alexandria (ca. 370–444) taught of the 

descent and of its saving benefits to the departed 

as “the fullest of all proofs of Christ’s love for man-

kind.”80 In a letter written to a Spanish bishop, 

Turibius, in 447, Pope Leo the Great affirms the 

descent.81 Though the idea was noticeably absent 

in the Council of Nicaea in 325,82 the Niceno-

Constantinopolitan Council of ad 381 denounced 

any who did not affirm the descent,83 the fourth 

Council of Toledo in ad 633 made it a point to 

insert language describing the descent into their 

writings,84 and the phrase became a part of the uni-

versally accepted version of the Apostles’ Creed in 

the eighth century.85 Later, the Council of Sens (ad

1140), supported by Pope Innocent II, condemned 

an error that had begun to creep into the church 

and was attributed to Peter Abelard, namely that 

“the soul of Christ per se did not descend to those 

who are below [ad inferos], but only by means of 

power.”86 Of special interest to Latter-day Saints, 

many leaders of the early Christian church pro-

fessed a belief in a descent into hell by quoting 

scriptures that have since been lost.87 The harrowing 

also appears as the subject of popular art and litera-

ture, including the great Divine Comedy. Georgia 

Frank traces the harrowing of hell from its earliest 

appearances in the New Testament, to “numer-

ous sermons and legends in late antiquity,” and to 

its survival “well into the Middle Ages.”88 It is also 

mentioned, though sparsely, in the writings of vari-

ous Catholic scholars as late as the thirteenth cen-

tury.89 Rather than Christ’s rescue of the imprisoned 

dead being an aberration in Christian thought, both 

its antiquity and longevity show it to be a normative 

Christian belief. 

Rejection of the Harrowing of Hell by 

Augustine, Aquinas, and the Reformers

The ideas and implications of the harrowing did 

not endure in good favor for everyone within Chris-

tianity. The writings of Augustine of Hippo in the 

fourth and fifth century vigorously reject any idea 

of a posthumous salvation,90 despite his being fully 

aware of the popularity of the doctrine for lay peo-

ple as well as for prominent writers91 and despite his 

own unequivocal acceptance of Christ’s descent into 

hell.92 For Augustine, the passages in 1 Peter made 

no reference to hades. He took the phrase “in the 

days of Noah” to mean just that: the spirit of Christ 

preached to the disobedient antediluvians before the 

flood. Augustine further extended the metaphor to 

mean that any disobedient spirits “in prison” simply 

referred to being “in the darkness of ignorance.”93

They had not physically died, but were, rather, spiri-

tually dead.94

Augustine strived to explain away this par-

ticular doctrine for at least three principal reasons. 

First, he felt it would undermine the authority gen-

erally of the church in this life. Second, he thought 

that “another” chance was unnecessary, for no one 

who had died since the resurrection had any excuse 

for not learning of and accepting Christ.95 And 

third, he felt it would defeat the purpose of mission-

ary work in mortality, concluding that “then the 

gospel ought not to be preached here, since all will 

certainly die.”96

Interestingly, Augustine struggled with the idea 

of a posthumous rescue. For example, he interprets 

Matthew 5:25–26—about coming to terms with 

one’s accuser quickly “lest . . . thou be cast into 

prison”—as a metaphor for the final judgment, but 

he is “troubled” by the phrase “till thou hast paid 

the uttermost farthing.”97 Could someone escape 

from an eternal prison? Augustine would like to 

say no, and so he tentatively tries to reinterpret 

the length of punishment by applying the use of the word until in Psalm 110:1 to the same word in 

Matthew, but ultimately concedes that “it is better 

to escape [the possibility of being sent to eternal 

punishment] than to learn its nature.”98 Indeed, 

any serious delving into the possibility of a tempo-

rary hell approaches heresy for Augustine, for “if 

mercy leads us to believe that the punishment of the 

wicked will come to an end, what are we to believe 

concerning the reward of the just, when in each 

case eternity is mentioned in the same passage?”99

Privately, Augustine wished that holy writ did not 

even mention a descent into hell.100

Although Thomas Aquinas believed that Christ 

descended to hell, he concluded that it served no 

salvific purpose. Evangelizing has no effect in hell 

since repentance is no longer possible after death, 

and repentance is impossible because individuals’ 

characters become set at death—the righteous will 

forever remain righteous, and the unrighteous will 

forever remain unrighteous.101 Although Aquinas 

taught that repentance is not possible after death, 

he affirmed that in mortality all people can believe 

and be saved. Nevertheless the beliefs necessary for 

salvation differ, depending on the times, places, and 

conditions in which people live. For example, an 

acceptance of the Trinity is required of those who 

live after the time of Jesus.102 So, although Aqui-

nas and Augustine differed as to whether Christ 

descended to hell, they agreed that evangelizing and 

thus repentance did not exist after death.

Under Augustine’s influence,103 Protestant 

Reformers also denied Christ’s descent to hell. John 

Calvin, for example, completely rejects any notion 

of Christ visiting hell to save anyone. For Calvin, 

the idea of a “descent into hell” is simply a reference 

to the intense suffering that Christ endured on the 

cross. Calvin explains it away, much like Augustine, 

into metaphor by referring to Isaiah’s prophecy of 

Christ’s sufferings in chapter 53: “There is nothing 

strange in its being said that he descended to hell, 

seeing he endured the death which is inflicted on 

the wicked by an angry God.”104 He calls any objec-

tions to that explanation (specifically, the question 

as to why the Creed mentions Christ visiting hell 

after his burial when his suffering preceded it) mere 

“trifling” and dismisses the popular idea that Christ 

literally visited hell to save souls as “nothing but a 

fable” and “childish.”105 The Church of the Palati-

nate as well as the catechism of Geneva took a simi-

lar view.106

Martin Luther was just as firm in closing the 

door on the possibility of salvation after death. He 

denied “the existence of a purgatory and of a Limbo 

of the Fathers in which they say that there is hope 

and a sure expectation of liberation. . . . These are 

figments of some stupid and bungling sophist.”107

Luther also interprets 1 Peter metaphorically, tak-

ing the “spirits in prison” to mean those in mortal-

ity who do not respond to the gospel message.108 In 

the aftermath of the Reformation, Christ’s descent 

into hell would be reduced to an obscure minority 

view, with but few witnesses to the once-ubiquitous 

doctrine.109

One might understand why religious leaders 

would want to squelch the notion of repentance 

after death: congregants can live immorally now 

and convert later. Thus, Augustine and others 

would declare that only this life determines our 

status in the next.110 How do Mormons respond to 

this problem since we affirm repentance after death?
We address this issue in a subsequent paper wherein 

we set out the latter-day restoration of postmortem 

evangelization. A further complication for religious 

leaders who believe in repentance after death is the 

implication that “the theory of postmortem evange-

lism takes the wind out of the sails of missions.”111

As one researcher surmises, the acceptance of post-

mortem salvation would “weaken the appeal of the 

Christian preachers to the terrors of the Lord, and 

. . . make the condition of the heathen preferable to 

that of Christians. It would involve, e.g., the pos-

sibility of salvation without baptism, without the 

knowledge of what Christ had done, and this would 

clash with the dogma which Augustine [and others] 

maintained so tenaciously.”112 However, although 

denying posthumous repentance restored urgency 

to evangelism, it did so at the cost of exacerbating 

the soteriological problem of evil. It was “common 

for ministers such as Augustine and Calvin to speak 

of the massa damnata as though it pained God not 

at all to damn anyone.”113 Sadly, some view God as 

so powerful and emotionally detached that, as one 

British philosopher points out, “for God a billion 

rational creatures are as dust in the balance; if a bil-

lion perish, God suffers no loss.”114

Additionally, the Reformers’ rejection of 

Christ’s harrowing comes not from one belief but 

from a package of theological commitments. It 

would be nearly impossible to teach the doctrine 

of predestination if people had an opportunity to 

progress after death.115 Furthermore, they “looked 

on the popular belief as traditional, not scriptural, 

they wished to wrest out of the hands of their oppo-

nents a belief which seemed to them to give some 

support to the Romish theory of purgatory, and to 

the practices which grew out of it.”116

Divine Perseverance and Other Contemporary 

Views

Despite Christianity’s well-nigh universal rejec-

tion of the harrowing and its implications, the idea 

that salvation is possible for mankind even after 

death can still be found among a few contempo-

rary theologians. Most notably, Gabriel Fackre, 

Abbot Professor of Christian Theology, Emeritus, 

at Andover Newton Theological School, supports a 

view he calls “divine perseverance,” or the idea that 

“those who die unevangelized receive an opportu-

nity for salvation after death. God condemns no 

one without first seeing what his or her response 

to Christ is.”117 He resolutely defends this position, 

which is strikingly congruent with the Latter-day 

Saint notion of postmortem evangelism, in his 

coauthored book What about Those Who Have 

Never Heard? Three Views on the Destiny of the 

Unevangelized. 

In the book, Fackre defends his view against 

two competing contemporary theologies: restrictiv-

ism espoused by Ronald H. Nash and inclusivism

championed by John Sanders. Restrictivism affirms 

that salvation requires that one accept Christ before 

death.118 Inclusivism proposes that some may be 

saved who did not know about Christ’s atonement, 

provided they respond in faith to the general reve-

lation of God’s goodness that he gives to all of his 

children in some measure.119

Fackre begins by explaining that his view fol-

lows directly from what we know of God’s attri-

butes, “that the power of God is, mysteriously, 

the way of the cross, the ‘weakness of God.’ The 

ultimate power is not machismo but the divine vulnerability. . . . God’s love is patient and persis-

tent. It outlasts us. It is a ‘weakness’ that is stronger 

than our rebellion. God’s weakness is a power-

ful powerlessness, a victorious vulnerability.”120

In other words, Fackre emphasizes that we do not 

truly know the goodness of God or his love for us.121

Fackre’s argument sketches an appealing model of 

God. God’s love is so great, so far beyond our mor-

tal comprehension, that God eternally “persists” in 

his attempt to gather his children. Indeed, what else 

could we expect from a being who possesses infinite 

love? Surely he does not draw a temporal “line” of 

love in eternity. Thus, because divine love endures, 

God will always persist in his evangelistic efforts 

until he gathers everyone. Fackre believes that this 

also follows from the justice of God. Since we are 

not accountable (condemned) for knowledge we do 

not have,122 everyone will have the opportunity in 

this life or the next to hear the good news.123

A second tier of Fackre’s argument is based 

upon God’s sovereignty. He states emphatically that 

“Christ can ‘do all things.’ No limits can be set to 

the triune God, except self-chosen limits.”124 In an 

effort to reach lost souls, Christ uses his power “to 

breach the very walls of death to make a ‘proclama-

tion to the spirits in prison’ (v. 19 [of 1 Peter 3]). 

Christ’s implacable power and love will persist to 

and through the final barrier of death. Even this last 

enemy is not strong enough to prevent the declara-

tion of the Word.”125 Damnation, then, is not a fail-

ure on God’s part but a failure of the individual.

To prepare us to accept Christ’s gospel, Fackre 

believes that God enlightens humankind (like the 

LDS notion of the “light of Christ”). In Noah’s day, 

God established the Noahic covenant, or the rain-

bow promise: “In Judaism, the rainbow promise has 

reference to the light given to those outside God’s 

special saving covenant with the Jewish people. That 

is, God will judge human beings . . . by the response 

they make to the universal hints of what is true and 

good and holy given from Noah’s time on.”126 And 

from Christ on “God gives to ‘all flesh’ an aware-

ness of basic moral and spiritual standards and 

expectations.”127

Finally, Fackre rests his case for postmortem 

evangelization upon the very same elements within 

the doctrine of the harrowing found in 1 Peter 

and the Apostles’ Creed that have been previously 

discussed. Christ’s preaching to and releasing 

souls from hell, he claims, is further evidence of 

God’s love and divine perseverance.128 For these 

reasons, Fackre asserts that “Christ came to rescue 

us from the death that is ‘the wages of sin’” and 

that this “stunning offer is made to ‘everyone who 

believes,’” 

129 regardless of when a person receives 

that opportunity. Another assertion is equally stir-

ring, stating that “divine perseverance will not deny 

the saving Word to any, and will contest all the 

makers of boundaries, including the final boundary 

[death].”130

With Fackre, the celebrated Anglican theolo-

gian Frederic W. Farrar similarly emphasizes the 

love of God and how the soteriological problem of 

evil conflicts with this. He also observes the teach-

ings of 1 Peter 4:6 and observes this poignancy: 

“Every effort has been made to explain away the 

plain meaning of this passage. It is one of the most 

precious passages of Scripture, and it involves no 

ambiguity. . . . For if language have any mean-

ing, this language means that Christ, when His 

Spirit descended into the lower world, proclaimed 

the message of salvation to the once impenitent 

dead.”131

Besides Fackre, many others have answered the 

question, What about those who have never heard 

the gospel? Both Thomas Aquinas and Norman 

Geisler believe that the message of the gospel will be 

sent to anyone who responds positively to the light 

they receive from God. Luis de Molina’s middle 

knowledge view maintains that God, because he 

knows how anyone would respond in any situation, 

may save those who would have believed in his Son 

had they heard his message. The Roman Catholic 

final option theory affirms that Christ “encounters 

all people at the moment they are dying,” giving 

everyone the opportunity in this life to accept or 

reject him. Others maintain an optimistic universal-

ism that God will save the vast majority (some say 

absolutely all) of his children, though the method is 

less important than this result. Pluralism maintains 

that all religions are valid ways of obtaining salva-

tion. And finally, others hold that the Bible does not 

support a conclusion in any form.132

Conclusion

God “sent not his Son into the world to con-

demn the world; but that the world through him 

might be saved” (John 3:17). The doctrine of the 

harrowing of hell explains how this can be despite the fact that so many have died without hearing 

the Son’s message of salvation. This doctrine was 

present in apocalyptic Judaism and in apocalyp-

tic Christianity, and Christ taught the doctrine to 

his disciples. It was also confirmed by the church 

fathers and in the Apostles’ Creed. Subsequently, it 

was rejected first by Augustine and later by Reform-

ers such as Calvin and Luther, This led, regrettably, 

to its almost universal disappearance from the 

teachings of modern-day Christendom. 

In a sequel to this paper, we will describe the 

restoration of the doctrine in the vibrant revelations 

of Joseph Smith and Joseph F. Smith and its further 

elaboration in Mormon datum discourse. These 

latter-day revelations and teachings disclose once 

again how Christ reopened the gates of hell to “let 

the prisoners go free,” thus once again resolving the 

soteriological problem of evil.
