Paul and the "third heaven" in 2
Corinthians 12:2

I know a person in Christ who fourteen years ago was caught up to the third heaven--
whether in the body or out of the body I do not know; God knows. (2 Cor 12:2 NRSV)
This passage is often cited in favour of the Latter-day Saint belief in multiple heavens,
something commensurate with D&C 76 and 131. However, a rather lame response has
been repeated by Evangelical critics of Latter-day Saint theology to the effect that the
"Mormon" reading of this passage is eisegesis, as the sky was the "first heaven," the
stars/universe to be the "second heaven," and where God dwells is the "third heaven,"
so there is only one "proper" heaven.
There is no evidence, however, that Paul was referring to the first and second heaven as
the sky and stars. Not one place in the Bible does it designate the sky as the "first
heaven" and the stars as the "second heaven." If the Lord and the apostles did not
designate these as such, why should the interpretation offered by Ron Rhodes and other
Evangelicals be accepted?
Further, why did Paul not just say "caught up into heaven"? Why put the word "third"
(τριτος) there? It would have been easier and would not result in any confusion? (So
much for the doctrine of the perspicuity of Scripture!) There is no evidence that they
would have.
Evangelical Protestant scholar, Paul Seely, wrote the following which refutes the
“response” as offered by the likes of Ron Rhodes, arguing that the ancients (and Paul)
did not differentiate between the stars/space and sky, as such was treated as being part
of the same heaven:
The question, however, naturally arises in the modern mind, schooled as it is in the
almost infinite nature of sky and space: Did scientifically naive peoples really believe in
a solid sky, or were they just employing a mythological or poetic concept?.... The answer
to these questions ... is that scientifically naive peoples thought of the solid sky as an
integral part of their physical universe. And it is precisely because ancient peoples were
scientifically naive that they did not distinguish between the appearance of the sky and
their scientific concept of the sky. They had no reason to doubt what their eyes told
them was true, namely that the stars above were fixed in a solid dome and the sky
literally touched the earth at the horizon. So they equated appearance with reality and
concluded that the sky must be a solid part of the universe just as much as the earth
itself. (Paul H. Seely, “The Firmament and the Water Above Part I: The Meaning
of raqia’ in Gen 1:6-8,” Westminster Theological Journal 53 (Fall 1991), p. 227 [available
online here])
In reality, ancient Jews and Christians did hold to a belief in multiple heavens. As
scholars such as Jean Daniélou have noted (The Theology of Jewish Christianity [1964],

174), Jewish Christians elaborated the three-heaven system into one of seven or more
heavens, but in all cases, beings of various degrees of glory were thought to inhabit
them, something we also find in the revelations of the Prophet Joseph Smith.
New Testament scholar, Frank J. Matera, wrote:
The mention of the “third heaven” indicates that Paul like many of his contemporaries,
thought of heaven as comprising multiple levels. But how many? Expressions such as
“heaven and the heaven of heavens” (Deut 10:14) and “heaven and the highest heaven”
(1 Kings 8:27; 2 Chr 2:6; 6:18) imply that there are at least two levels of heaven, a
notion also found in 1 En. 71:5. Certain intertestamental writings, however, reckon with
even more levels. The Testament of Levi (chap. 3), for example, refers to three heavens:
the first contains the spirits that will carry out God’s judgement; the second holds the
armies of God that are prepared for the day of judgment; and in the third the great glory
of God dwells in the Holy of Holies. In Martyrdom and Ascension of Isaiah (7-11),
however, Isaiah journeys through seven heavens, and when he arrives at the seventh, he
sees a wonderful light, innumerable angels, and all the righteous. Finally, the J
Recension of 2 Enoch speaks of ten heavens, identifying the tenth as the place where
Enoch views the face of the Lord that is not to be talked about since it was so marvelous
(chap. 22). Since Paul is intent upon showing the surpassing character of his own
ecstatic experience, and since he appears to identify the third heaven with paradise, he
likely thinks of the third heaven as the highest heaven, the place where God dwells.
Unlike the writers of the intertestamental books, however, he steadfastly refuses to
describe the different levels of heaven or his journeys through them. (Frank J. Matera, II
Corinthians [New Testament Library; Louisville: Westminster/John Knox Press, 2002], 280)
This is another instance where Latter-day Saints are on the side of sound biblical
exegesis; Latter-day Saint theology and the revelations given to the Prophet Joseph are
to be taken seriously, and should not be dismissed so naively as they are by many
misinformed critics.
For a scholarly treatment of 2 Cor 12:1-10, see Paula R. Gooder, Only the Third Heaven?
2 Corinthians 12:1-10 and Heavenly Ascent (Library of New Testament Studies vol. 313:
London, T&T Clarke, 2006).

Paul's vision in 2 Corinthians 12 and
Apocalyptic Eschatology

In my post, Paul and the "third heaven" in 2 Corinthians 12:2, I discussed some of the
evidence for the historical Latter-day Saint interpretation of this passage as being biblical
evidence for plural heavens, á la D&C 76 and 131. Such a concept is also found in the
pseudepigrapha:
Take him up into paradise, into the third heaven, and leave him there until that fearful day of
my reckoning, which I will make in the world. (Apocalypse of Moses 37:5)
And then he spake to the archangel Michael: "Depart into paradise in the third heaven and
bring to me three garments of fine Syrian linen." (Apocalypse of Moses 40:1)
James Charlesworth, a leading biblical scholar, has a recent article that discusses, in part,
Paul’s visionary experience as recorded in this chapter which is rather enlightening:
2 Corinthians and its Three-Dimensional Apocalyptic Eschatology
According to 2 Corinthians, Paul describes “revelations of the Lord” that he has experienced.
Note his description and caution:
I know a man in Christ who fourteen years ago was caught up to the third heaven—whether
in the body or out of the body I do not know, God knows. And I know that this man was
caught up into Paradise—whether in the body or out of the body I do not know. God
knows—and he heard things that cannot be told, which man may not utter. (2 Cor. 12:2-4;
RSV)
Paul is certain that he was taken up into the third heaven, saw paradise, and heard things that
can never be revealed. These three concepts are developed within the Jewish apocalypses and
apocalyptic writings. Ascension dominates in many apocalypses. Two Jewish apocalyptic
compositions place paradise in the third heaven; the most important one is 2 Enoch. And
within the apocalypses, there are revealed insights that can be communicated only to the elect
ones, if at all. Paul could have known the traditions that were later incorporated into 2 Enoch:
And the men took me from there. They brought me up to the third heaven. And they placed
me in the midst of Paradise. And that place has an appearance of pleasantness that has never
been seen. Every tree was in full flower. Every fruit was ripe, every food was in yield
profusely; ever fragrance was pleasant. And the four rivers were flowing past with gentle
movement, with every kind of garden producing every kind of good food. And the tree of life
is in that place, under which the LORD takes a rest when the LORD takes a walk in Paradise.
And that tree is indescribable for pleasantness of fragrance. (2 En. 8:1-3; recension A58)
(James H. Charlesworth, “Paul, the Jewish Apocalypses, and Apocalyptic Eschatology” in
Gabriele Boccaccini and Carlos A. Segovia, eds. Paul the Jew: Rereading the Apostle Paul

as a Figure of Second Temple Judaism [Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 2016], 83-105, here, p.
96)
Matthew Goff, in the same volume, has this to offer on 2 Cor 12, which also touches Paul’s
boasting (cf. Joseph Smith: Boastful Prophet?)
Second Corinthians resonates powerfully with Enochic ascent traditions in other ways. Paul
was taken up to paradise and the third heaven (2 Cor. 12:2, 4). In 2 Enoch paradise, the
ultimate abode of the righteous, designed after the garden of Eden, is likewise in the third
heaven. In 3 Enoch, the visionary who journeys to heaven is not Enoch, but Rabbi Ishmael.
He speaks with Enoch/Metatron in heaven. He reveals divine knowledge to the rabbi.
Ishmael’s goal is “to behold the vision of the chariot” (3 En. 1:1). 3 Enoch is an important
example of merkabah mysticism, a late antique phenomenon in the context of which rabbis
devised various ecstatic techniques one could use to obtain a vision of the “chariot,” a
reference to God seated upon his heavenly throne. Paul may have used some of these
practices to attain the vision mentioned in 2 Corinthians 12 . . . Paul’s assertion about his
vision can also be helpfully interpreted in relation to ancient Jewish accounts of heavenly
ascents (2 Cor. 12:6). One of the Dead Sea Scrolls, entitled the Self-Glorification
Hymn (4Q491c), contains an account of someone claiming to have had some sort of
experience in heaven that transformed him. He asserts that he is now among the angels. He
boasts about his transformed status. He asks “Who is comparable to me in my glory?” (line 8)
Moreover, the speaker claims that because of this experience, he is able to endure sorrow and
suffering as no one else can (line 9).
Paul has a lot to be modest about. Moreover, he asserts that he was given a thorn in the flesh
and torments by Satan, so that he may not become too elated (verse 7). He experiences
weakness and hardships which he gladly boasts about (verses 11-12). Such boasting makes
sense in the context of his view, common throughout his letters, that the heavenly world is
radically distinguished from the worldly plane of existence. Weakness, like foolishness, for
Paul while bad from a conventional, or one could say “worldly” perspective, become
emblems of affinity with heaven (for example, 1 Cor. 1:25-27). Weakness and hardship are,
in the mindset of Paul, worthy of boasting. And they, so understood, are not dissimilar to
ascent visions, since both signify affinity with the heavenly realm. Paul turns to both his
suffering and his ascent to bolster his authority among the Corinthians (2 Cor. 11:7; 12:11).
The Self-Glorification Hymn suggests Paul’s combination of these two themes of suffering
and ascension is not simply a topos unique to his thought or social situation. It is compatible
with how other Jews in antiquity described their visions of heavenly ascent. (Matthew Goff,
“Heavenly Mysteries and Otherwordly Journeys Interpreting 1 and 2 Corinthians in Relation
to Jewish Apocalypticism” in Boaccini and Segovia, eds. Paul the Jew, pp. 133-48, here, pp.
142-144)

"Third Heaven" in 2 Enoch and the
Apocalypse of Moses

2 Enoch 8:1-9:1

8 |About the taking of Enoch to the 3rd heaven. Word “7.”|

1* And those men took me from there, and they brought me up to the third heaven,
and set me down |there|. Then I looked downward, and I saw Paradise. And that place
is inconceivably pleasant.
2* And I saw the trees in full flower. And their fruits were ripe and pleasant-smelling,
with every food in yield and giving off profusely a pleasant fragrance.

3 And in the midst (of them was) the tree of life, at that place where the LORD takes a
rest when he goes into paradise. And that tree is indescribable for pleasantness and
fine fragrance, and more beautiful than any (other)

created thing that exists. 4 And from every direction it has an appearance which is
gold-looking and crimson, and with the form of fire. And it covers the whole of
Paradise. And it has something of every orchard tree and of every fruit. And its root is
in Paradise at the exit that leads to the earth.
5* And paradise is in between the corruptible and the incorruptible. And two streams
come forth, one a source of honey and milk, and a source which produces oil and
wine. And it is divided into 4 parts, and they go around with a quiet movement. 6 And
they come out into the paradise of Edem, between the corruptible and the
incorruptible. And from there they pass along and divide into 40 parts. And it
proceeds in descent along the earth, and they have a revolution in their cycle, just like
the other atmospheric elements.

7* And there is no unfruitful tree there, and every tree is well fruited, and every place
is blessed.

8 And there are 300 angels, very bright, who look after Paradise; and with never-
ceasing voice and pleasant singing they worship the LORD every day and hour. And I

said, “How very pleasant is this place!” And those men said to me:

9 |The revelation to Enoch of the place of those who are righteous and kind. Word
“8.”|

1* “This place, Enoch, has been prepared for the righteous,

who
suffer every kind of calamity in their life
and
who
afflict their souls,
and
who
avert their eyes from injustice
and
who
carry out righteous judgment
who
give bread to the hungry,
and
who

cover the naked with clothing,
and
who
lift up the fallen,
and
who
help the injured and the orphans,
who
walk without a defect before the face of the LORD,
and
who
worship him only—

even for them this place has been prepared as an eternal inheritance.” (F.I. Andersen,
"2 (Slavonic Apocalypse of) Enoch," in James H. Charlesworth, The Old Testament
Pseudepigrapha, Volume 1: Apocalyptic Literature and Testaments [New York: Yale
University Press, 1983], 114–11)

2 Enoch 42:3

And I ascended to the east, into the paradise of Eden, where rest is prepared for the
righteous. And it is open as far as the 3rd heaven; but it is closed off from this world.
(Ibid., 168)

Apocalypse of Moses 37:4-5

4* He lay three hours, and so the LORD of all, sitting on his holy throne, stretched out
his hands and took Adam and handed him over to the archangel Michael, saying to
him, 5* “Take him up into Paradise, to the third heaven, and leave (him) there until

that great and fearful day which I am about to establish for the world.” 6 And the
archangel Michael took Adam and brought him away and left him, just as God told
him at the pardoning of Adam. (M.D. Johnson, "Life of Adam and Eve," in James H.
Charlesworth, The Old Testament Pseudepigrapha, Volume 2: Expansions of the “Old
Testament” and Legends, Wisdom and Philosophical Literature, Prayers, Psalms, and
Odes, Fragments of Lost Judeo-Hellenistic Works [New York: Yale University Press,
1985], 291 [The Apocalypse or Revelation of Moses is the Greek edition of The Life
of Adam and Eve])

Apocalypse of Moses 40:1-2

1Then he spoke to the archangel Michael, “Go into Paradise in the third heaven and
bring me three cloths of linen and silk.” 2* And God said to Michael, Gabriel, Uriel,
and Raphael, “Cover Adam’s body with the cloths and bring oil from the oil of
fragrance and pour it on him.” And thus they did and prepared his body (Ibid., 291)

Jonathan T. Pennington on the
Development of Multiple Heavens in the
New Testament Era

The case of plural ουρανοι and multiple heavens in the Second Temple apocalyptic
literature is more difficult to navigate. It appears that some multiple heavens views
were extant in the first-century CE, though how developed and widespread these were
is unclear. Most notable is Paul’s reference to the “third heaven” in 2 Corinthians
12:2, one of the few indications of a multiple-heavens cosmology we can
confidently date to the first-century CE. The more highly-developed seven-heavens
views familiar to use from texts such as 2 Enoch and the rabbinic materials may be
contemporary with the latest writings of the NT, though most of these likely come
from a later period as these views developed. (Jonathan T. Pennington, Heaven and
Earth in the Gospel of Matthew [Grand Rapids, Mich.: Baker Academic, 2007], 129)

Early Christians and 1 Corinthians 15:40-
42

There are also celestial bodies, and bodies terrestrial: but the glory of the celestial is
one, and the glory of the terrestrial is another. There is one glory of the sun, and another
glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars: for one star differeth from another
star in glory. So also is the resurrection of the dead. It is sown in corruption; it is raised
in incorruption. (1 Cor 15:40-42)
There is a strong, early Christian pedigree for understanding this pericope to mean
more than just about heavenly and earthly bodies, but to have a meaning similar to the
traditional LDS interpretation thereof, based on D&C 76:96-98, which reads:
And the glory of the celestial is one, even as the glory of the sun is one. And the glory of
the terrestrial is one, even as the glory of the moon is one. And the glory of the telestial
is one, even as the glory of the stars is one; for as one star differeth from another star in
glory, even so differs one from another in glory in the telestial world.
For instance, Irenaeus of Lyons held that this pericope was about the variegated
rewards and glories given to those after the Resurrection, and even stated that his
interpretation was apostolic in origin:
And as the presbyters say, Then those who are deemed worthy of an abode in heaven
shall go there, others shall enjoy the delights of paradise, and others shall possess the
splendour of the city; for everywhere the Saviour shall be seen according as they who
see Him shall be worthy. [They say, moreover], that there is this distinction between the

habitation of those who produce an hundred-fold, and that of those who produce sixty-
fold, and that of those who produce thirty-fold: for the last will be taken up into the

heavens, the second will dwell in paradise, the last will inhabit the city and that was on
this account the Lord declared, "In My Father's house are many mansions." For all
things belong to God, who supplies all with a suitable dwelling-place, even as His Word
says, that a share is allotted to all by the Father, according as each person is or shall be
worthy. And this is the couch on which the guests shall recline having been invited to
the wedding. The presbyters, the disciples of the Apostles, affirm that this is the
gradation and arrangement of those who are saved, and that they advance through
steps of this nature; also that they ascend through the Spirit to the Son, and through the
Son to the Father, and that in due time the Son will yield up His work to the Father, even
as it is said by the Apostle, "For He must reign till He hath put all enemies under His feet.
The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death." (Against Heresies 5.36.1-2)
Other early Christian witnesses to this interpretation include:
Clement of Alexandria (Stromata 6:14)

CHAP. XIV.—DEGREES OF GLORY IN HEAVEN

Such, according to David, “rest in the holy hill of God,” in the Church far on high, in
which are gathered the philosophers of God, “who are Israelites indeed, who are pure in
heart, in whom there is no guile; ”6 who do not remain in the seventh seat, the place of rest,
but are promoted, through the active beneficence of the divine likeness, to the heritage of
beneficence which is the eighth grade; devoting themselves to the pure vision of insatiable
contemplation.
“And other sheep there are also,” saith the Lord, “which are not of this fold”—deemed
worthy of another fold and mansion, in proportion to their faith. “But My sheep hear My
voice,”9 understanding gnostically the commandments. And this is to be taken in a
magnanimous and worthy acceptation, along with also the recompense and
accompaniment of works. So that when we hear, “Thy faith hath saved thee,” we do not
understand Him to say absolutely that those who have believed in any way whatever shall
be saved, unless also works follow. But it was to the Jews alone that He spoke this
utterance, who kept the law and lived blamelessly, who wanted only faith in the Lord. No
one, then, can be a believer and at the same time be licentious; but though he quit the
flesh, he must put off the passions, so as to be capable of reaching his own mansion.
Now to know is more than to believe, as to be dignified with the highest honour after
being saved is a greater thing than being saved. Accordingly the believer, through great
discipline, divesting himself of the passions, passes to the mansion which is better than the
former one, viz., to the greatest torment, taking with him the characteristic of repentance
from the sins he has committed after baptism. He is tortured then still more—not yet or not
quite attaining what he sees others to have acquired. Besides, he is also ashamed of his
transgressions. The greatest torments, indeed, are assigned to the believer. For God’s
righteousness is good, and His goodness is righteous. And though the punishments cease in
the course of the completion of the expiation and purification of each one, yet those have
very great and permanent grief who are found worthy of the other fold, on account of not
being along with those that have been glorified through righteousness.
For instance, Solomon, calling the Gnostic, wise, speaks thus of those who admire the
dignity of his mansion: “For they shall see the end of the wise, and to what a degree the
Lord has established him.” And of his glory they will say, “This was he whom we once held
up to derision, and made a byword of reproach; fools that we were! We thought his life
madness, and his end dishonourable. How is he reckoned among the sons of God, and his
inheritance among the saints?”13
Not only then the believer, but even the heathen, is judged most righteously. For since
God knew in virtue of His prescience that he would not believe, He nevertheless, in order
that he might receive his own perfection gave him philosophy, but gave it him previous to
faith. And He gave the sun, and the moon, and the stars to be worshipped; “which God,” the
Law says, made for the nations, that they might not become altogether atheistical, and so
utterly perish. But they, also in the instance of this commandment, having become devoid of
sense, and addicting themselves to graven images, are judged unless they repent; some of
them because, though able, they would not believe God; and others because, though
willing, they did not take the necessary pains to become believers. There were also,
however, those who, from the worship of the heavenly bodies, did not return to the Maker

of them. For this was the way given to the nations to rise up to God, by means of the
worship of the heavenly bodies. But those who would not abide by those heavenly bodies
assigned to them, but fell away from them to stocks and stones, “were counted,” it is said,
“as chaff-dust and as a drop from a jar,”15 beyond salvation, cast away from the body.
As, then, to be simply saved is the result of medium actions, but to be saved rightly and
becomingly2

is right action, so also all action of the Gnostic may be called tight action; that
of the simple believer, intermediate action, not yet perfected according to reason, not yet
made right according to knowledge; but that of every heathen again is sinful. For it is not
simply doing well, but doing actions with a certain aim, and acting according to reason, that
the Scriptures exhibit as requisite.
As, then, lyres ought not to be touched by those who are destitute of skill in playing the
lyre, nor flutes by those who are unskilled in flute-playing, neither are those to put their
hand to affairs who have not knowledge, and know not how to use them in the whole of
life.
The struggle for freedom, then, is waged not alone by the athletes of battles in wars, but
also in banquets, and in bed, and in the tribunals, by those who are anointed by the word,
who are ashamed to become the captives of pleasures.
“I would never part with virtue for unrighteous gain.” But plainly, unrighteous gain is
pleasure and pain, toil and fear; and, to speak comprehensively, the passions of the soul,
the present of which is delightful, the future vexatious. “For what is the profit,” it is said, “if
you gain the world and lose the soul?” It is clear, then, that those who do not perform good
actions, do not know what is for their own advantage. And if so, neither are they capable of
praying aright, so as to receive from God good things; nor, should they receive them, will
they be sensible of the boon; nor, should they enjoy them, will they enjoy worthily what
they know not; both from their want of knowledge how to use the good things given them,
and from their excessive stupidity, being ignorant of the way to avail themselves of the
divine gifts.
Now stupidity is the cause of ignorance. And it appears to me that it is the vaunt of a
boastful soul, though of one with a good conscience, to exclaim against what happens
through circumstances:—
“Therefore let them do what they may;
For it shall be well with me; and Right
Shall be my ally, and I shall not be caught doing evil.”
But such a good conscience preserves sanctity towards God and justice towards men;
keeping the soul pure with grave thoughts, and pure words, and just deeds. By thus
receiving the Lord’s power, the soul studies to be God; regarding nothing bad but ignorance,
and action contrary to right reason. And giving thanks always for all things to God, by
righteous hearing and divine reading, by true investigation, by holy oblation, by blessed
prayer; lauding, hymning, blessing, praising, such a soul is never at any time separated from
God. Rightly then is it said, “And they who trust in Him shall understand the truth, and those
faithful in love shall abide by Him.”8 You see what statements Wisdom makes about the
Gnostics.
Conformably, therefore, there are various abodes, according to the worth of those who
have believed. To the point Solomon says, “For there shall be given to him the choice grace
of faith, and a more pleasant lot in the temple of the Lord.”10 For the comparative shows
that there are lower parts in the temple of God, which is the whole Church. And the

superlative remains to be conceived, where the Lord is. These chosen abodes, which are
three, are indicated by the numbers in the Gospel—the thirty, the sixty, the hundred. And
the perfect inheritance belongs to those who attain to “a perfect man,” according to the
image of the Lord. And the likeness is not, as some imagine, that of the human form; for this
consideration is impious. Nor is the likeness to the first cause that which consists in virtue.
For this utterance is also impious, being that of those who have imagined that virtue in man
and in the sovereign God is the same. “Thou hast supposed iniquity,” He says, “[in
imagining] that I will be like to thee.”12 But “it is enough for the disciple to become as the
Master,” saith the Master. To the likeness of God, then, he that is introduced into adoption
and the friendship of God, to the just inheritance of the lords and gods is brought; if he be
perfected, according to the Gospel, as the Lord Himself taught.1

Origen of Alexandria (First Principles 2.10.2)
2. Since the heretics, however, think themselves persons of great learning and wisdom, we
shall ask them if every body has a form of some kind, i.e., is fashioned according to some
shape. And if they shall say that a body is that which is fashioned according to no shape,
they will show themselves to be the most ignorant and foolish of mankind. For no one will
deny this, save him who is altogether without any learning. But if, as a matter of course,
they say that every body is certainly fashioned according to some definite shape, we shall
ask them if they can point out and describe to us the shape of a spiritual body; a thing which
they can by no means do. We shall ask them, moreover, about the differences of those who
rise again. How will they show that statement to be true, that there is “one flesh of birds,
another of fishes; bodies celestial, and bodies terrestrial; that the glory of the celestial is
one, and the glory of the terrestrial another; that one is the glory of the sun, another the
glory of the moon, another the glory of the stars; that one star differeth from another star in
glory; and that so is the resurrection of the dead?” According to that gradation, then, which
exists among heavenly bodies, let them show to us the differences in the glory of those who
rise again; and if they have endeavoured by any means to devise a principle that may be in
accordance with the differences in heavenly bodies, we shall ask them to assign the
differences in the resurrection by a comparison of earthly bodies. Our understanding of the
passage indeed is, that the apostle, wishing to describe the great difference among those
who rise again in glory, i.e., of the saints, borrowed a comparison from the heavenly bodies,
saying, “One is the glory of the sun, another the glory of the moon, another the glory of the
stars.” And wishing again to teach us the differences among those who shall come to the
resurrection, without having purged themselves in this life, i.e., sinners, he borrowed an
illustration from earthly things, saying, “There is one flesh of birds, another of fishes.” For
heavenly things are worthily compared to the saints, and earthly things to sinners. These

1 Clement of Alexandria, “The Stromata, or Miscellanies,” in Fathers of the Second Century: Hermas,
Tatian, Athenagoras, Theophilus, and Clement of Alexandria (Entire) (ed. Alexander Roberts, James
Donaldson, and A. Cleveland Coxe; vol. 2; The Ante-Nicene Fathers; Buffalo, NY: Christian Literature
Company, 1885), 2505–506.

statements are made in reply to those who deny the resurrection of the dead, i.e., the
resurrection of bodies.2

John Chrysostom (Homilies on 1 Corinthians 41:4)
4. From hence in what follows, he introducing also the difference of the resurrection
which shall then be. For do not suppose, because grain is sown and all come up ears
of grain, that therefore there is also in the resurrection an equality of honor. For in
the first place, neither in seeds is there only one rank, but some are more valuable,
and some inferior. Wherefore also he added, to each seed a body of its own.
However, he is not content with this, but seeks another difference greater and more
manifest. For that you may not, when hearing, as I said, that all rise again, suppose
that all enjoy the same reward; he laid before even in the preceding verses the
seeds of this thought, saying, But each in his own order. But he brings it out here
also more clearly, saying,

1 Corinthians 15:39

All flesh is not the same flesh. For why speak I, says he, in respect of seeds? In
respect of bodies let us agitate this point, concerning which we are discoursing now.
Wherefore also he adds, and says,
But there is one flesh of men, another flesh of beasts, another of birds, and another
of fishes.

1 Corinthians 15:40

There are also celestial bodies, and bodies terrestrial; but the glory of the celestial is
one, and the glory of the terrestrial is another.

2 Origen, “De Principiis,” in Fathers of the Third Century: Tertullian, Part Fourth; Minucius Felix;
Commodian; Origen, Parts First and Second (ed. Alexander Roberts, James Donaldson, and A.
Cleveland Coxe; trans. Frederick Crombie; vol. 4; The Ante-Nicene Fathers; Buffalo, NY: Christian
Literature Company, 1885), 4294.

1 Corinthians 15:41

There is one glory of the sun, and another glory of the moon, and another glory of
the stars: for one star differs from another star in glory.
And what means he by these expressions? Wherefore from the resurrection of the
body did he throw himself into the discourse of the stars and the sun? He did not
throw himself out, neither did he break off from his purpose; far from it: but he still
keeps to it. For whereas he had established the doctrine concerning the resurrection,
he intimates in what follows that great will be then the difference of glory, though
there be but one resurrection. And for the present he divides the whole into two:
into bodies celestial, and bodies terrestrial. For that the bodies are raised again, he
signified by the grain: but that they are not all in the same glory, he signifies by
this. For as the disbelief of the resurrection makes men supine, so again it makes
them indolent to think that all are vouchsafed the same reward. Wherefore he
corrects both. And the one in the preceeding verses he had completed; but this he
begins now. And having made two ranks, of the righteous and of sinners, these
same two he subdivides again into many parts, signifying that neither righteous nor
sinners shall obtain the same; neither righteous men, all of them, alike with other
righteous, nor sinners with other sinners.
Now he makes, you see, first, one separation between righteous and sinners, where
he says, bodies celestial, and bodies terrestrial: by the terrestrial intimating the
latter, and by the celestial, the former. Then farther he introduces a difference of
sinners from sinners, saying, All flesh is not the same flesh, but there is one flesh of
fishes, another of birds, and another of beasts. And yet all are bodies; but some are
in more, and some in lesser vileness. And that in their manner of living too, and in
their very constitution.
And having said this, he ascends again to the heaven, saying, There is one glory of
the sun, and another glory of the moon. For as in the earthly bodies there is a
difference, so also in the heavenly; and that difference no ordinary one, but reaching
even to the uttermost: there being not only a difference between sun and moon,
and stars, but also between stars and stars. For what though they be all in the
heaven? Yet some have a larger, others a less share of glory. What do we learn from
hence? That although they be all in God's kingdom, all shall not enjoy the same
reward; and though all sinners be in hell, all shall not endure the same punishment.
Wherefore he added,

1 Corinthians 15:42

So also is the resurrection of the dead.
So, How? With considerable difference. Then leaving this doctrine as
sufficiently proved, he again comes to the proof itself of the resurrection and the
manner of it, saying,

The "Mormon" interpretation of Matthew
13:8/Mark 4:20 in Fragments of Papias

As the presbyters say, then those who are deemed worthy of an abode in heaven shall
go there, others shall enjoy the delights of Paradise, and others shall possess the
splendour of the city; for everywhere the Saviour will be seen, according as they shall
be worthy who see Him. But that there is this distinction between the habitation of
those who produce an hundred-fold, and that of those who produce sixty-fold, and
that of those who produce thirty-fold; for the first will be taken up into the heavens,
the second class will dwell in Paradise, and the last will inhabit the city; and that on
this account the Lord said, “In my Father’s house are many mansions:” (Fragments of
Papias, V; cf. Irenaeus, Against Heresies 5.36.2)