Chapter Nine

At last Jeremy's chronic fear of pursuit assumed objective form. Once during the
early morning and once again during the following night, the fleeing boy in his small boat
was overtaken by flotillas of war canoes loaded with armed men.
Even in darkness, his left eye could see them clearly enough for him to distinguish
what they were and whose insignia they bore-one force carried the blue flower on a
white ground of Lord Kalakh, whose troops had taken part in several massacres. The
second was less fearsome, the Republic of Morelles, displaying burgundy and yellow. In
each case their multiple wakes gently rocked his small craft as they passed.
Jeremy's left eye saw the warboats and their occupants differently than his right. The
colors of boats and people varied slightly, in subtle ways that the boy supposed must have
some significance, though he was unable to interpret the variations. The craft belonging
to Kalakh, though painted white and blue, glowed in small spots with a bright but
phantasmal red that he took as a serious warning.
Jeremy understood, without really thinking about it, that what he was seeing was only
part of the ongoing maneuvering for power among rival warlords. Basically it was part of
the same struggle that had killed his parents half a year ago. Aided by his marvelous new
eyesight, he was able to steer well clear of these bodies of marine infantry. They in turn
paid him no attention as they hurried on their way. Each time this happened he stopped
paddling and frankly stared-what else would a lone figure in a boat be likely to do ?-
and each time he was ignored.
On a third occasion he was overtaken after dawn, still looking for his day's resting
place. He panicked in the belief that the squadron of boats coming downstream at great speed, either Lord Kalakh's or those of some unknown power, were, in fact, pursuing
him. For several minutes he paddled frantically in a mad effort to stay ahead-but when
he despaired of outspeeding all those husky rowers and set his course for shore, they
simply ignored him and continued straight down the river. Watching them speed by, while
his heart and lungs gradually resumed their normal action, he allowed himself to believe
for the first time that there might be no one actively pursuing him, tracking him
downstream from Uncle Humbert's village.
If it was true that no one was actively hunting him, then maybe he had overestimated
the importance of Sal's mysterious gift-and of himself as its custodian and her
messenger. Was it possible that the raid he had just survived had been launched for some
purpose unconnected with Sal and her treasure? Or for no purpose at all except as an
exercise in savagery? But Jeremy had trouble believing that. The men riding into the
village had been intent and purposeful, though the creatures they commanded had
blundered; and Sal, though terrified to see them, had not been really surprised.
So far Sal's treasure had escaped the hands of those marauders. Not that Jeremy felt
he could take any credit. Only sheer good luck, it seemed to him, had thrown them off his
track. No one could rely on good luck, but it seemed that he had nothing better.
Over the next couple of days he also saw cavalry patrols, lancers mounted on long-
necked cameloids, one-hump mutated droms, their insignia obscured with camouflage,
plodding their way along the shore. But the men were looking for something or someone
else. Jeremy took care to keep out near midriver, but the man onshore showed no interest
in him or his boat.
Except for these occasional glimpses of bodies of armed men, Jeremy encountered
very little traffic on the river. He supposed that with war flaring in the region, people who
had any choice about the matter had fled to safer places or were staying home. It was also
possible that many boats had been commandeered by one faction or another.

As Jeremy steadily paddled south and west, the country visible along the riverbanks
changed, becoming different in striking ways from anything he could remember ever
seeing before. Vegetation was somewhat thicker, and the air seemed wetter, intensifying
the late summer's heat. The river was broader and deeper, having merged with others-
whether the stream he now traveled should still be called the Aeron was more than
Jeremy could say. Wild birds he could not recognize flew crying overhead.
The information Sal had failed to give him was now available in his new memory.
Still, Jeremy did not know just where he was in relation to Pangur Ban and could only
guess how far he might still have to go to reach the city or the Academy. Regarding the
Academy his new memory gave him relatively little help.
Once or twice when passing one of the rare fishing boats he thought of hailing them
and asking how far the sea might be. But he didn't do so, not wanting the local people to
remember a young stranger on a long journey.

***

Every night, a little after sunset, Jeremy pushed off from his day's place of
concealment and resumed his cruise downstream.
And eventually there came a night when he beheld a strange sight, low in the sky
ahead of him. All night long there arose in the distance, reflected against clouds, a faint,
odd, attractive glow that was visible only through his left eye. On the next night it was
back again, a little brighter and a few miles nearer. The source, whatever it might be, was
vastly closer and lower than the Mountain.
The river was changing around him, first day by day, then hour by hour. Gradually, at
first, then suddenly in an explosion of channels and multiplication of islands. The stream spread out to an indeterminate width and began to lose itself, dividing into a hundred
lesser flows.
Long days ago he'd lost the count of days and nights, but the feeling was growing in
him that the goal of his journey must be near. Wanting to keep a sharp lookout for the
Academy or anything that might give him a clue to its location, Jeremy decided now to
travel by daylight.
On the first afternoon of progress under this new regime he noted that the mysterious
glow was now bright enough to be seen by day. Pallidly visible only through his left eye,
it appeared low in the northwest sky, ahead of him and to his right.
By midafternoon he had drawn much closer. The source itself was still out of sight
behind several ranks of island trees. This mild light, now rippling in a way that seemed to
beckon, was the very opposite of the red warning signals with which his left eye had
tagged the Kalakh canoes.
Jeremy paddled toward it. Now listening carefully, he could barely detect, with both
ears, the distant sound of a woman's voice. It was far too faint to let him make out words,
but she seemed to be shouting, ranting about something.
Accepting the glow as guidance provided by some friendly god, Jeremy was soon
paddling down a smaller channel. Presently this led him into a backwater bayou, a
serpentine of water almost motionless -and this again, at its farther end, into a more
active channel. All the land above water was thickly overgrown with trees and dense
underbrush.
He thought the source of the strange illumination was now little more than a hundred
yards ahead. The brightness was slowly fading as he drew near, as if its only reason for
existence had been to capture his attention.
When he had put a dozen or so of the taller intervening trees behind him, there came
into his view the upper portion of a strange half-ruined building, towering above the screen of jungle that still intervened.
Jeremy had not gone much farther in its direction when he heard the woman's voice
again, carrying strongly across an expanse of open water. It was shrill but strong, raised
in fierce argument-but no, he presently decided, not really argument, because no one
ever answered. Rather, she was engaged in a strident, prolonged, abusive harangue. He
could not make out all the words, but he got the impression that several people were
objects of her wrath. It would be an unlucky individual indeed who caught it all.
In the boy's left ear her voice sounded with a mellow ring, distinguishing it from the
fishwife screeching he'd sometimes heard from villages or other boats as he passed them.
He took this to mean that there was something good about it-good for him at least.
Now he was no more than about fifty yards away from the bellicose woman. Paddling
slowly and cautiously, keeping a sharp eye on the scene before him as it was gradually
revealed by the curving channel, the boy deftly pulled his canoe behind a screen of reeds
close to the marshy shoreline and looked out through them to get a good view of the
huge, looming structure, whatever it might be. Docked immediately in front of it was a
kind of boat or raft that Jeremy Redthorn's eyes had never seen before -and yet it was
disturbingly familiar. The glow that had guided him thus far was emanating from this
vessel-and now that he had come in direct sight of it, that strange illumination faded,
evidently having served its purpose.
At the edge of the channel rose half-ruined stone walls perhaps forty feet high and of
formidable thickness, the remains of a building whose size and shape were totally unlike
those of any structure familiar to Jeremy Redthorn. Even in its fallen state the massive
structure was by far the largest that he had ever seen. It rose out of the swamp in the form
of an irregularly truncated pyramid, built of blocks of stone, most of them much bigger
than a man might lift. Here and there vegetation was growing out of the structure, where
time had eaten cracks and holes into its fabric-some of the plants were only moss and vines, but in several spots sizable trees put forth their twisted branches. Windows in the
shape of pointed arches framed various degrees of interior darkness, and here and there a
doorway was visible, reached by the remnants of an exterior stair.
Looking at the ruin, Jeremy felt an inward jar, an unexpected sense of familiarity.
Somewhere in the seemingly bottomless pool of his new memories he thought there
lurked knowledge of the purpose of this building and even a good approximation of what
it must have looked like when it was new. But those memories conveyed no sense of
urgency, and calling them up could wait.
A good part of what had once been an extensive stone dock in front of the odd
building seemed to have crumbled away. The unfamiliar boat tied up at the narrow
portion that remained was much larger and rode much higher in the water than Jeremy's
tiny craft. The single mast rising from the deck between its joined twin hulls bore a flag,
marked with the stylized symbol of a burning torch. Jeremy recognized it at once as the
Academy logo.
He had only a moment in which to wonder how he had been able to make the
identification-conceivably Sal had mentioned it to him. But he had to admit to himself
that the memory was more likely a part of the frighteningly great trove that had come into
his head along with her mysterious treasure.
As soon as Jeremy focused his attention on the boat before him, his new memory
served up the type's proper name-he was looking at a catamaran. This example
consisted of twin narrow hulls of shallow draft, some thirty feet in length, surmounted by
a flat platform, somewhat narrow in relation to the length of the boat. On the platform,
just a little aft of amidships, stood a square-built house or shelter. Just aft of this
deckhouse, an awning covered a kind of galley, which would no doubt be centered on a
box of sand in which to keep a fire. Each of the twin hulls was enclosed, providing
considerable sheltered space belowdecks.

The name, painted on the near side of the nearest hull (and he presumed it would be also
on the far side of the other), was Argos. The word conveyed rich meanings-or Jeremy
could tell that it would have done, had he allowed himself to probe for them in his new
memory.
In a vessel of this type, the crew, none of whom were now in evidence, probably slept
on deck, under another awning, which was was now half-fallen, adding to the general
picture of disarray. The craft could be propelled by oars or by a fore-and-aft spritsail-
Jeremy could now vaguely recognize the type, and a moment's thought brought up more
terminology, as well as understanding. Neither sail nor oars were ready to be used just
now, being both in disarray.
When the boy directed his penetrating left-eye gaze at the vessel, he was also able to
recognize certain kinds of lamps and various nautical tools and pieces of equipment,
things that Jeremy Redthorn had never laid eyes on before.
But he had little time to spare just now for such details. His gaze was immediately
drawn to the slender figure of a woman, white-haired but lithe and energetic, who was
pacing back and forth with desperate energy on the nearby dock. Behind her, the walls of
irregular stonework went up, sloped back, then again straight up, and angling back again,
toward a broken pinnacle of structure more than four stories above the greasy-looking
surface of the sluggish channel that curved around the building so as to front it on two
sides.
Above the woman, partly over the boat and partly over the platform where she was
standing, hung the single sail, half-furled, awkward and useless. Happily for sail and
boat, there was practically no wind at the moment. She was waving her arms and calling
at random, in distress, though more in anger than in panic. Her manner was that of a
woman who fully expected someone to hear her and pay attention but was unsure of just
who her audience might be or where they were From a distance the white hair hanging almost to her shoulders seemed to be tightly
curled. Her face had a pinkish cast, suggesting sunburn. Her feet wore sandals; her
slender body was clad in neat trousers and tunic, suggesting a kind of uniform, in which
the color white predominated.
In one hand the woman occasionally brandished a short sword, which she waved
about as if trying to threaten someone with it. But the object of her wrath was nowhere to
be seen, and she seemed to have no clear idea as to the direction in which it, or he, or
they might be found. At intervals she again replaced the weapon in a sheath that hung
from a broad leather belt and put both hands to other use.
Supine beside her, on the stone quay along the broken, magic-glowing temple (and
the oddness of the building kept demanding Jeremy's attention: who would have
constructed such a thing in the middle of a vast swamp?) debated with the headless
statues of peculiar monsters, lay the figure of a dark-haired, dark-skinned man, nude
except for a skimpy loincloth and so motionless that Jeremy at first believed him dead.
Then he saw the man's head turn slowly from side to side; life had not fled. Experience
that was not Jeremy Redthorn's, though now it had come to dwell in him, interpreted the
quivering of the fellow's arms and legs as the final tremors of some kind of fit, not
dangerous to life. He lay surrounded by an incomplete layout of magical stuff, debris
suggesting that the fellow had been struck down in the very midst of his calculations or
incantations, while trying to prepare himself for the visitation of a god.
Suddenly Jeremy took note of the fact that the Argos was not tied up properly at the
quay. The nearest stone bollard to which it might have been secured was crumbling as
part of the pyramid's general decay. Only the feebleness of the current just there kept the
vessel from drifting slowly away.
A slight breeze was now stirring the leaves of the swampy forest whose nearest
branches actually overhung the catamaran, and the half-furled sail flapped ineffectively. The watching boy wondered if the Argos was supposed to be driven or guided by some
sort of magic. If so, the magic did not appear to be working. There were always stories
about magic that did work or that had worked in Grandfather's youth, but Jeremy
Redthorn in his own short life had never seen any-at least not until the past few days.
Ever since Sal's treasure had gone flowing like some enchanted liquor into Jeremy's
head, he had been struggling more or less continuously with a kind of mental vertigo, a
condition having nothing to do with physical dizziness or balance-or with traditional
ideas of magic. It was as if his mind now stood upon a narrow and slippery beam,
teetering over an absolute ocean of new memory, a sea of experience and knowledge to
which he had no right. Fear whispered to him that if he ever fell, plunged wholly into
those depths, he might very well be drowned, his very self dissolved to nothingness in an
alien sea.
Trying hard now to distract himself from such horrors, he concentrated his attention
on the Argos, which had been built with a marvelous precision. All visible surfaces were
painted or varnished. The lines and the white sail looked new, not stained or rotted. The
whole equipage was very well cared for, or had been at least until very recently-but now
Jeremy thought that an air of futility had descended on the whole enterprise, magical and
mundane.
It was not only the sail that seemed to have been suddenly abandoned. Several oars
were also lying around on deck, as if the crew had simply let them fall before abandoning
ship. At least one oar had gone overboard and was slowly drifting away. There were a
few spare weapons also, a short spear in one place, a bow and quiver of arrows in
another.
Jeremy was getting the impression that it was the absent crew who were the targets of
the lady's wrath. She was carrying on as if they might be hiding somewhere nearby, in
range of her voice, though actually that seemed unlikely. One of the angry woman's problems, and probably not the smallest one, was that the whole damned boat now
seemed to be drifting helplessly.
Well, that problem, at least, might be one that Jeremy could do something about.
Somewhere in Jeremy's head, but by some intelligence not part of the mind with
which he had been born, an estimate was being made: To judge by the fittings of the
catamaran, and the number of spare oars currently available, there probably ought to be
six or eight people in her normal crew. The present situation could be explained by
assuming that they had all jumped ship and run off. Maybe they had been frightened by
the illness of the dark-skinned man-or perhaps the explanation lay elsewhere.
Again the woman's thin, high voice was raised in imprecations, which seemed to be
directed at no one she could actually see. At this distance her words carried clearly across
the water, to be easily heard by Jeremy's ears, both right and left. Her language was the
common one of Jeremy Redthorn's homeland, her accents quite understandable to
someone from the villages. He listened with awe and a kind of admiration. She had
thought up some truly venomous and special curses to bestow upon the people -Jeremy
was now virtually certain that she meant the deserting crew-who had left her in this
predicament. Now and then she paused for breath, gazing into the distance as if she
hoped to catch sight of the objects of her wrath, who had to be somewhere out there.
These two people were obviously individuals of some importance, and their flag said
they were connected with the Academy. Helping them ought to give Jeremy the very
opening he needed toward the fulfillment of his vow to Sal.
The boy in his canoe, continuing to observe the couple from behind his screen of
reeds, raised a hand to scratch his itchy scalp and was glad that he had decided long days
ago to wash off the dried mud.
Springing into action, he paddled his canoe briskly to the woman's assistance,
adroitly detouring a few yards to pick up the drifting oar before the listless current got around to bearing it away. Then, after securing his own small vessel to the catamaran, he
climbed aboard and seized the line with which the woman was already struggling.
The woman quickly became aware of his approach but did not appear surprised by it;
she stood nodding in Jeremy's direction, with her small fists planted on her hips, as if she
wondered what had taken him so long. It's about time, her attitude seemed to say. About
time the world woke up to its duty and came to her assistance. Her clothing, while of
practical design for an active person in hot weather, proclaimed her as wealthy, and a fine
gold collar around her neck confirmed this.
Quickly she sized up Jeremy-he realized that he must present an odd-looking figure
-but she made no comment. She spoke to him imperiously.
"Thank all the gods." She made a brisk summoning gesture. "Come aboard quick;
give me a hand here."
"Yes'm."
As he drew close, he saw that at a distance her whitish hair had deceived even his new
keen eyesight. At close range he could see that the face beneath it, despite its stern
expression, was very young. She was probably no older than Jeremy himself. Eyes even
greener than his own and sharp elfin features. Several of the girl's small fingers bore
valuable rings.
She had now ceased, for the moment, her scolding and cursing of the absent boatmen.
Obviously her chief concern, as she ran about with the incongruous sheathed sword
banging against her slender legs, was the man's welfare.
And again, as soon as the drifting had been checked: "Never mind that! Help me here,
with him!"
Jeremy wondered if the girl could be a priestess of some god or assortment of gods.
His new memory could not confirm this but neither did it find evidence that the idea was
impossible.
After some difficulty the two of them got the craft turned in solidly against the stone
dock. Then Jeremy, springing ashore, secured it firmly, with another line, to some
stonework that seemed likely to endure for a while.
Now that she had an active helper, the young woman announced her determination to
cast off as soon as the unconscious man and a few essentials had been carried aboard. She
was ready to abandon certain other items; when Jeremy volunteered to go back for them,
she refused his offer.
On the inner side of the dock, one or two dark doorways led directly into the broken
pyramid. It was too dim in there for Jeremy to even guess at what the building might
contain.
As they were making their slow progress away from the ruined dock, she looked back
now and then, in the manner of someone who feared pursuit. Jeremy was quite used to
that manner now, having observed it in himself for many days.
But there was one item, a small box of ivory and ebony, that she made very sure to
have on board. Jeremy caught only a brief glimpse of it and did not see where the young
woman put it away.
When he got the chance to take a close look at the unconscious man, Jeremy could
detect no obvious injuries. Dark-mustached, thin-faced, naturally well muscled but
somehow ascetic-looking, about thirty years of age. His nearly naked body was marked
in several places with painted symbols, so extensively that the natural color of his skin
was hard to make out. The designs showed, among other things, his Academic standing.
Jeremy could read them now.
His hands were soft, those of an aristocrat.
"What happened to him, ma'am?" the boy inquired cautiously. No blood, bruises, or
swellings were visible on the unconscious body, which was breathing regularly.
"Never mind. He has been taken ill. But it will pass. Be careful with him! Don't worry; it's not catching."
But after Jeremy and the girl between them had somehow got the immediate
emergency under control, she tersely informed the boy that the man had been rapt in
some kind of meditation when the fit came over him.
"Did you say 'the fit,' ma'am?"
She wasn't going to waste a lot of time explaining things to a river rat. "Help me
move him. We've got to get him down out of the sun. Into the cabin."
"Yes, ma'am." And once more Jeremy sprang to obey.
It was a difficult job. The man was a deadweight, his lean body muscular and heavier
than it looked, and his unscarred, well-nourished frame was difficult to maneuver. The
belt of his scanty loincloth offered about the only handhold.
The lady-if she deserved that status-unbuckled her sword belt and with a muttered
curse threw it aside to clatter on the deck.
Soon the man's inert frame had somehow been shifted to a safer, more secure
position, in one of the two narrow built-in bunks inside the cabin. One bunk was on each
side, and both were made up with neat pillows, and smooth, clean sheets the like of
which Jeremy had rarely seen before. There was even mosquito netting.
Taking a brief look around inside the small cabin, the boy caught a glimpse of men's
and women's clothing and other items to be expected in a place where people lived. Most
startling was the sight of what seemed to him a hundred books- more scrolls and
volumes than Jeremy Redthorn had seen, in total, before today. The majority of these
were stacked on a worktable, broad as the whole deckhouse, whose remaining surface
was littered with more papers and parchments, weighted down by the instruments of
natural philosophy. Dried bones in a round cup, used for casting lots. A kind of
magnifying glass. Tools for dissecting biological specimens? With at one side a dead
lizard cut open and fastened down on a board by pins. It looked like some nasty child's experiments in torture, but new memory-when Jeremy dared risk a quick look into its
depths-offered reassurance. No, this is a matter of what those who are highly placed at
the Academy call odylic philosophy. You look at their entrails and seek omens therein. It
is largely a waste of time.
And he was being given little time or opportunity to gawk. They were outside again,
where the young woman directed Jeremy to their next task. Working together, pushing
with poles against the shallow bottom, they were eventually able to get the craft moving
downstream, like an animal that had to be prodded into recognizing its master's purpose.
A shadow, not easily distinguishable from that of a large tree's limb, moved on deck.
Looking up, Jeremy saw that a giant snake, scales faintly iridescent in the sun, clinging to
an overhanging branch was beginning to take an interest in the boat and its contents.
While Jeremy poled, the woman stood by with drawn sword, fiercely ready to try to hack
the thing's head off. Its open mouth looked a foot wide, lined with lovely red and
equipped with a full armory of backward-slanting teeth.
A moment later, the heavy body thudded down on deck, and she struck it and
eventually drove it writhing into the water, meanwhile screaming orders at Jeremy to
keep on poling. If he didn't, the mast was going to catch on more branches and they'd be
hopelessly enmeshed. He understood the situation quite well; her screaming didn't help
any, but he put up with it in silence.
Snake blood spattered as the huge body, thick as Jeremy's waist, contorted and the
lashing tail sent small objects flying, philosophers' tools and sailors' also. But head and
neck remained stubbornly connected.
When he'd got the boat safely out away from the trees he came to help. At last a
combined effort sent the monster overboard with a great splash. But Jeremy's flesh
crawled when he saw how other low branches, ones they'd narrowly avoided, were
bowed with the weight of more gigantic snakes.

While Jeremy dug the lower end of a pole into the bottom of the channel and strained
his wiry weight against the upper end, doing his best to steer, keeping the catamaran from
running afoul again on reeds and stumps, the girl went back into the deck-house to check
on the condition of the man. Jeremy could hear her voice, low, asking something, and
then a man's voice, sounding dull and sleepy, answering.
Jeremy's feet had been slipping in snaky blood, and he grabbed up a bucket and used
a minute to dip water from the river and sluice down the deck.
In a minute the girl was out again, leaning on the rail. She had now unbelted her
sword, as if wanting to be rid of the weight as soon as there were no more snakes. She did
not look at Jeremy, and she spoke abstractedly, as if to the world in general: "He began to
talk-he kept crying out, 'The god is coming near, the god-'And then he went off, like
this .... " She turned her head toward Jeremy, looking straight through him, letting her
voice trail off.
"Has he had fits like this before?" Jeremy as a child-and this, he felt confident, was
certainly his own memory-had had a playmate subject to falling and convulsing fits.
Jeremy didn't know why the question was important now, but he knew a curiosity that
wanted to be satisfied. Perhaps it was not entirely his own.
Now the young woman's gaze did at last focus on the boy, as if she had not really
seen him until this moment. She seemed to be preparing a sharp retort, only to reconsider
it. "Not as bad as this one," she answered at last.

And, in fact, the man did not truly regain consciousness, and a little later Jeremy entered
the deckhouse and put his hand on the man's forehead. The victim sighed, making a
sound like one relieved of worry. But he remained unconscious.
Earlier the girl had stuffed a small roll of cloth into the man's mouth, to keep him
from biting his tongue. Now she tentatively eased out the barrier, checking to make sure
the fit was over.

A breeze had come up, feeling welcome on Jeremy's sweaty skin. It would have been
even more welcome if they had known what to do with the sail, but new memory gave
him no help on that. Out on deck, pieces of the torn-up parchment were blowing about.
Jeremy snatched one up. The writing on it was in a language never seen before by Jeremy
Redthorn, but now he could read it readily enough-at least with his left eye-the gods
alone knew how. A mere glance, evoking ancient memories, told him that it was part of a
set of instructions for conducting a ritual, intended to call up demons. The symbolic
destruction of that ritual was part of a greater one for-not summoning-inviting, or
beseeching, the attendance of a god.
And Jeremy also knew, with a certainty that came welling up from his new sea of
memory, that neither form of conjuration, as they were written here, had any chance of
being effective. The how and why of such matters would take deep plunging in the sea to
learn.
The young woman, gathering up stray scrolls and the other things her man had been
using, was putting them away, stuffing them into some kind of chest.
Also, she had evidently hidden her special little ebony and ivory box somewhere. The box had disappeared when Jeremy looked inside the deckhouse-she must have shoved it
under one of the bunks, he thought, or maybe back in one of the far corners. There would
be no shortage of hiding places amid the clutter.
Then it seemed that she gave up, as if admitting to herself that these other things were
not worth the effort.
With a kind of automatic movement, she snatched from Jeremy's hands the scroll he
had been looking at. Taking full notice of him for the second time, she pronounced
judgment: "You are a bizarre-looking child indeed. Where do you come from?"
It had been years since anyone had called Jeremy a child, and he didn't know what to
think of the description now, particularly when it came from someone not much older
than himself. He gestured vaguely with his free hand. "Upstream, ma'am."
For the moment that was enough to satisfy her curiosity. She gazed at him a second
longer, then nodded and went on with what she had been doing.
The channel they had entered was turning shallow again, and more hard work ensued.
This round lasted for several minutes, with girl and boy both leaning hard on poles one
minute, paddling furiously the next. Jeremy soon found himself giving orders-he had
some childhood experience with boats, which had been considerably sharpened and
deepened during the past few days. This made him a more logical candidate for captain,
or at least for temporary pilot, than the girl. Fortunately, she accepted his assumption of
command without comment and without apparent resentment. Soon they were running
free and clear again, back in one of the river's more vigorously flowing channels. Still the
open way was narrow, with overhanging branches.
Every minute or so the young woman turned her head, looking back along the way
that they had come, as if in fear that someone or something could be following them. Her
behavior added to Jeremy's own chronic nervousness.
"We must get out of this misbegotten swamp," she said aloud. "We must find an open channel and move downstream." She added another phrase that the Intruder easily
interpreted as an exotic obscenity, couched in a language native to many who lived
halfway around the world.
It had sounded like she was speaking to herself, but Jeremy decided to answer
anyway. "Yes, ma'am. River's flowin' freer now. Not so many islands 'n' snags 'n'
things. There'll be a way."
