Chapter Five

Gasping out almost forgotten prayers, Jeremy improvised a few new ones while he
dived again, driving himself to the verge of drowning in his desperate effort to escape.
Lunging about blindly underwater, he almost swam right past the boat he wanted but
managed to correct his error in time. Again his head broke the surface of the river, and at
last his grasping fingers closed on the canoe's gunwale. His heart leaped when he saw
that a paddle had been left aboard, stowed under the center seat. Feverishly he groped for
and found the bit of cord holding the canoe loosely to the dock, and after some clumsy
fumbling he undid the knot.
Bracing his feet against the dock, he got the vessel under way with a shove, then got
himself aboard with a floundering leap that landed him in a sodden heap and almost
capsized the vessel. A moment later he was sitting up and had the paddle working.
For a moment it seemed that the path to freedom might now be clear-then a fury
materialized out of the evening sky to strike at him twice more. Two more lashing blows,
which felt as if they were delivered with red-hot wire, fell on the backs of his legs, first
right, then left. Involuntarily the boy screamed and started to spring to his feet, only to
trip and fall face downward back into the water. The plunge carried him out of the fury's
reach, and he stayed under, holding his breath, as long as possible. When he surfaced
again he was behind the boat and started pushing it downstream, paddling furiously with
his feet.
He braced his nerves against another slashing attack, but it never came. The monster
had flapped away while he was underwater.
* *

Jeremy was several hundred yards downstream before he pulled himself back into the
boat and found, to his dismay, that the paddle had somehow vanished.
Then his spirits surged. There was the paddle, floating at no great distance, visible in
the dark water as a darker blot, against the reflection of the sunset. In a moment he had
hand-propelled the canoe close enough and had it in his grip.
With every movement, the slash wounds skewered him with almost blinding pain,
pain that diminished only slightly if he held still. His sensations, his imagination, warned
him that he could be bleeding to death. But no, Sal had been beaten worse than this and
hadn't bled to death.
Terror kept him moving, despite the pain.

Deepening dusk was overtaking him, but with terrifying slowness. Whatever
concealment full night might offer was still long minutes in the future. Desperately he
tried to recall if there were any prayers to Night personified. The name of that god should
be Nox, he thought, or was it Nyx? He seemed to remember both names from children's
stories, heard in a different world, the early years of childhood. But neither name inspired
any hope or confidence.

** *

Avoiding the local islands and sandbars, whose positions had been fixed in his mind during the months he'd lived nearby, was easy enough. But once Jeremy's flight carried
him around the big bend, half a mile downstream from the Raisinmakers' village, he
found himself in totally unfamiliar territory.
He kept on working the paddle steadily, fear allowing him to ignore the pain in legs
and shoulder. Fortunately, he'd spent enough of his childhood in canoes to know how to
handle this one. It was his good luck, too, that the river was now high with upstream rains
and moving fairly swiftly.
In the dark he found it well nigh impossible to judge distances with any accuracy.
Moonlight, which ought to have helped, had he been blessed with normal vision, only
seemed to add an extra layer of enchantment and deception.
In one way fortune had smiled on him; he'd been able to get away with a canoe,
instead of being forced to settle for one of the heavy clam-fishing craft. He could drive
such a light vessel farther and faster with a single paddle than he'd ever have been able to
move a rowboat, even if he'd been lucky enough to get one with a good pair of oars.

* *

Frequently during that long night, when a dim perception of something in the river or
in the sky brought back terror Jeremy felt himself in the greatest peril. Drifting or
paddling as best he could while making a minimum of noise, he muttered heartfelt
prayers to every other god and goddess whose name he could remember-though none of
them, as far as he knew, had ever even been aware of his existence. He had no way to tell
if the prayers did any good, but at least he was surviving.
The tree-lined shores to right and left were hazy black masses, totally bereft of lights.
Hours into his journey, when the last of the sun glow was completely gone, there was still a dim blurred glow, faint and familiar, high in the night sky. His poor sight could
distinguish this from the more localized blur of the moon. People had told him that it
came from a cloud of stars called the Milky Way. The sight of the bright smear was
somehow reassuring.
Meanwhile the light of the burning village remained visible for a long time, at least an
hour, in the eastern sky. But Jeremy and his boat were not molested again. Finally he
gave up on trying to be quiet and used his paddle steadily.
Vividly Jeremy could recall how, when he was small, his father and mother had begun
to teach him the old stories about the planets and constellations, how various celestial
objects were intimately connected with different gods and goddesses.
The presence of the all-but-unseen stars above him brought back memories of his
parents. One night in particular, long ago, when he'd gone fishing with his father. But
Jeremy was not going to allow himself to think of them just now.
He even considered including, for the first time he could remember, prayers to
Dionysus and Priapus-but in the end he declined to do that. The memory of their
statues, saluting each other with wine cups in the midst of horror, convinced him that
neither of them was likely to take any interest in his welfare.
Meanwhile, the wound that cut across the back of his right shoulder continued to burn
like fire, and so did those on the backs of his legs. First one and then another of the three
slashes hurt badly enough that he could almost forget about the other two. Only fear that
the enemy might be close behind him, and the memory of his pledge to Sal, enabled him
to press on, whimpering aloud.

* * *

Fear tended to make every half-seen minor promontory a ghastly crouching fury, ready to
spring out and strike. Even floating logs were terrible. Several times during the night,
trying to steer among the ghostly shapes and shadows of unfamiliar shores and islands,
paddling or huddling in the bottom of the boat, Jeremy heard more soft commotion in the
air above him, taking it to be the detestable sounds made by the furies' and the furies'
wings.
And there was a certain unusual light in the night sky.
Let it burn, was all that he could think, looking back at the last embers of red light
decorating the northeastern sky, reflecting off the vineyard slopes on the hill above the
village and into a patch of low clouds. He could feel only vaguely sorry for the people.
Already his aunt and uncle were only dim and half-remembered figures, their faces and
manners as hard to call up as those of folk he had not seen for many years; it was the
same with everyone he had known, everything he had experienced in the last months,
since his parents and his home had been destroyed.
Everyone but Sal.
Jeremy supposed that the total time he'd spent actually in the company of Sal, adding
up the fragments of his hasty visits over a period of three days, amounted to less than an
hour. But in those three days Sal had become vastly more important to him, even more
real, than Uncle Humbert or Aunt Lynn had ever been. No matter that he'd known his
aunt and uncle since his infancy and had been eating and sleeping in their house for
months.
Every once in a while his memory reminded him with a little jar that Sal had probably
not been her real name. Never mind. That didn't matter. He would find out her real name,
eventually-when he told the story of her last days to Professor Alexander or Margaret
Chalandon.
It seemed, now, to the traveler alone on the river in darkness, that he could remember every word that Sal-that name would always be holy to him, because she'd chosen it-
had ever spoken to him in their brief meetings. Every gesture of her hands, look on her
face, turn of her head. She was coming with him as a living memory-and yes, his
mother and father were with him as well. It was as if some part of him that had died with
his parents had somehow been brought back to life by Sal.
Paddling on as steadily as he could, peering nearsightedly into the darkness ahead,
Jeremy thought that, leaving aside the memory of Sal, he was bringing with him out of
his last half-year of life very little that would ever be of any use, or worth a coin.
For one thing, a new understanding of what death meant-he'd certainly learned that.
A good set of worker's calluses on his hands. Some creditably strong muscles-for his
age. On the useless side, a few semi-indelible grape juice stains, on hands and arms and
feet, marks that would doubtless stick to his skin at least as long as the ragged clothing
Aunt Lynn had provided still hung on his back.
And that, Jeremy thought, just about summed it up.
Except, of course, for the three painful wounds he had so recently collected. But they
would heal in time. They had to. He kept hoping that if he refused to think about the
injuries, they might not hurt so much. So far that strategy did not seem to be working.
Jeremy wished neither aunt nor uncle any harm-any more than he did any other pair
of strangers. But he found himself hoping that Uncle Humbert's barrow, the heavy one
the boy had so often trundled up and down the hillside path, was burning, too.
With every movement of his right shoulder, propelling himself downstream, the pain
of the fury's lash wound brought tears to Jeremy's eyes. But still it wasn't the pain, sharp
as that was, that brought the tears. They were welling up because his injuries were the
same as Sal's and tied the two of them more closely together.

** *

Gradually, as the hours of darkness passed, and the heavenly blurs of the newly risen
moon and fading Milky Way slowly shifted their positions toward the west, his distance
from the village grew into miles. The red glow faded and at length was gone completely.
When the first morning grayness tinged the eastern sky, Jeremy paddled in to shore and
grounded his canoe under the dim, spiky silhouette of a willow thicket.
Stumbling ashore in exhaustion, then dragging his boat up higher until it was firmly
beached, he lay down on his left side, sparing his right shoulder, and, despite his injuries
and the fact that his stomach was empty, fell quickly into a dreamless stupor.

.. he frowned with the breaking of the last filaments of some dream. Something
important had been conveyed to him while he slept-he had the feeling it was a vital
message of some kind-but he could not remember what it was.
He was waking up now, and it was daylight. Even before opening his eyes Jeremy felt
for the pouch inside his shirt. Sal's treasure was still there, but strangely, the mysterious
contents seemed to have softened and even slightly changed shape, so that when Jeremy
had rolled over in his sleep the corners and hard edges he'd earlier detected had somehow
modified their contours to keep from stabbing him.
His three wounds and their demanding pain seemed to awaken only an instant after he
did. He felt slightly but ominously unwell, in mind and body, and he dreaded fever and
delirium. Only too well he remembered Sal's illness, caught from the furies' slashes on
her flesh, a sickness that had been close to killing her even before the second attack swept
in.

With eyes open and Sal's treasure in hand he lay quietly for a while, trying to think, but only gloomy imaginings were the result. By the time he roused himself and looked
around, morning was far advanced. Mist was rising from the river, his shirt and trousers
were still almost dripping wet from last night's soaking, and the air was almost chill.
Every time he started to move, the fury's lash marks stabbed his back and legs with
renewed sensation. Pain settled in to a steady throbbing.
He hadn't yet even tried to investigate the wounds. Only now did his probing finger
discover that the cloth of shirt and trousers had actually been cut by the blows, just as
Sal's clothing had been.

It was common knowledge that some hundreds of miles downstream the greater rive
to which the Aeron was a tributary emptied into the sea, which Jeremy could not
remember ever seeing-though from his first dim understanding of what an ocean must
be like he had yearned to see it.
And he had known, even before encountering Sal, that at that river's mouth there wa
a harbor, where huge ships from the far corners of the world sailed in and out, and that
the city beside the harbor, Pangur Ban, was overlooked by the castle of a great lord,
Before meeting Sal, Jeremy ha
never spent any time at all thinking about the Academy, but often he had yearned to see
the ocean.

Victor, whose power largely sponsored the Academy.

Gradually the mist began to dissipate, as if the sun, supposedly Apollo's property, were truly burning it away. Jeremy raised his eyes to behold above him a great tangle of
the feathery leaves of willow branches. Beyond the topmost branches arched a partly
cloudy sky ...
Slowly he got to his feet, forcing himself to move despite the pain, and began to walk
about, rubbing his eyes. Scratching his head, he thought, All that part of my life is over
now. Sal is dead. But he had the strange feeling that, thanks to her, he, Jeremy Redthorn,
had somehow come back to life. He had a job to do now. And he was going to do it, if it
killed him.
Peering about him, he tried in his nearsighted fashion to see something of what lay
across the broad surface of the river. He could see a line of hazy green that must mean
trees, but not much beyond that. Patiently listening for what his ears could tell him, he
eventually decided that there were no towns or villages nearby-he would have heard
some sound of human activity, carrying across the water, and there had been nothing of
the kind. Sniffing the breeze, he caught only river smells, no traces of a settlement's
inevitable smoke.
After walking along the shore for a few yards upstream and down, he concluded that
he had come aground on a fairly sizable island. The river was much wider here than it
had been at Uncle's village, at least one large tributary evidently having come in.
At the moment the sky was empty of any threat.

Jeremy's stomach, unfed for many hours, continued to insist that food should be the
first order of business. He could only remember with regret the food he'd been carrying
to Sal-after all his swimming and struggling, only a few wet crumbs remained.

Searching his stolen canoe without much hope, he discovered under the forward thwart a
small closed compartment, containing half a stale corn cake, from which someone must
have been breaking off pieces to use as fishbait. The bait served as breakfast, washed
down with river water. Now, in late summer, he might well be able to gather some berries
in whatever woods he came across. With any luck he could find mushrooms, too. And the
wild cherries were now ripe enough to eat without too much fear of bellyache.
Wading in the shallows right beside the shore, he tried without success to snatch fish
out of the water with his hands. He'd seen that trick done successfully once or twice. It
gave him something to occupy his mind and hands, though probably success would have
done him no good anyway, for he lacked the means to make a fire, and he wasn't yet
starved enough to try raw fish. He'd heard of people eating turtles, which ought to be
easier to catch, and also that turtle eggs could be good food. But he had no idea where to
look for them.

Jeremy's best guess was that he might have made twenty miles or more down the
winding stream during the night-maybe, if he was lucky, half that distance as a fury
might fly. Having reached what appeared to be a snug hideaway, he decided to stay where
he was until night fell again. He had no idea how well furies could see at night or whether
they, and their two-legged masters, might still be looking for him-but they hadn't found
him last night, when he'd been moving on the open water.
If he made a practice of lying low every day and traveling only at night, he would
escape observation by fisherfolk in other boats and by people on shore, as well as by at
least some of his enemies aloft. He could not shake the idea that some of the beasts and it.

people who'd attacked Uncle Humbert's village might still be following him downstream.
Now, it seemed he'd done about all the planning he could do at the moment. The urge
to do something else had been growing in the back of his mind, and now he could think
of no reason to put it off any longer-he meant to take a good look at Sal's parting gift.
For some reason she'd been reluctant even to tell him what it was. Not that it
mattered; whether it turned out to be priceless diamonds or worthless trash, he was going
to take it on to Professor Alexander-or Margaret Chalandon-or die in the attempt. But
it seemed to the boy that he at least had a right to know what he was carrying.
He felt inside his shirt to make sure that the strange thing was still where he had put

It was time to take it out and give it a look. He didn't see how he could be any worse
off for knowing what it was.
One more thing bothered Jeremy. Why had Sal, when her treasure was mentioned,
kept saying that she was not worthy? Not worthy to do what?
