Chapter Six

Making a conscious effort to distract himself from ongoing hunger and pain, Jeremy
sat down on the grass, holding the pouch, meaning to examine its contents carefully. His
vision had always been keen at close range, and now he was working in full daylight.
He tore open the crude stitches that, as he now discovered, had been holding the
pouch closed. Taking out the single object it contained, he held it up against the light. It
was a fragment of a carved or molded face, apparently broken or cut from a mask or
statue.
For one eerie moment he had an idea that the thing might be alive, for certainly
something inside it was engaged in rapid movement, reminding him of the dance of
sunlight on rippling water. Inside the semitransparent object, which was no thicker than
his finger, he beheld a ceaseless rapid internal flow, of ... of something ... that might
have been ice-clear water, or even light itself, if there could be light that illuminated
nothing. Jeremy found it practically impossible to determine the direction or the speed of
flow. The apparent internal waves kept reflecting from the edges, and they went on and
on without weakening.
And, stranger still, why should Jeremy have thought that the pupil of the crystal eye
in the broken mask had darkened momentarily, had turned to look in his direction and
even twinkled at him? For just a moment he had the fleeting impression that the eye was
part of the face of someone he had known ... but then again it seemed no more than a
piece of strangely colored glass. Not really glass, though. This was not hard or brittle
enough for glass.
Whatever it might cost him, he would carry this object to Professor Alexander at the Academy. Or to Margaret Chalandon. Silently he renewed his last pledge to Sal.
Brushing his hair out of his eyes, he turned the object over and over in his hands.
Its thickness varied from about a quarter of an inch to half an inch. It was
approximately four inches from top to bottom and six or seven along the curve from right
to left. The ceaseless flow of ... something or other inside it went on as tirelessly as
before.
Somehow Jeremy had never doubted, from his first look at this fragment of a
modeled face, that it was intended to be masculine. There was no sign of beard or
mustache, and it would have been hard for him to explain how he could be so sure. The
most prominent feature of the fragment was the single eye that it contained-the left-
which had been carved or molded from the same piece of strange warm, flexible,
transparent stuff as all the rest. The eyeball showed an appropriately subtle bulge of
pupil, and the details of the open lid were clear. No attempt had been made to represent
eyelashes. An inch above the upper lid, another smooth small bulge suggested the
eyebrow. A larger one below outlined the cheekbone. No telling what the nose looked
like, because the fragment broke off cleanly just past the inner corner of the eye. On the
other side it extended well back along the side of the head, far enough to include the
temple and most of the left ear. Along the top of the fragment, in the region of the temple,
was a modeled suggestion of hair curled close against the skull.
Around the whole irregular perimeter of the translucent shard the edges were
somewhat jagged, though Jeremy remembered that they had not scratched his skin. Now
when he pushed at the small projections with a finger, he found that they bent easily,
springing back into their original shape as soon as the pressure was released. Everything
about the piece he was holding suggested strongly that it was only a remnant, torn or
broken from a larger image, that of a whole face or even an entire body.
What he was looking at was most likely meant to be the image of a god. Jeremy reached that conclusion simply because, in his experience, people made representations
of deities much more often than of mere humans. Which god this might be Jeremy had no
idea, though somehow he felt sure that it was neither Dionysus nor Priapus. What the
whole face of the statue or carving might have looked like-assuming it had once been
complete-was impossible to say, but Jeremy thought that it had not been, would not be,
ugly.
Well, few gods were hard to look at. Or at least very few of their portrayals were. He
realized suddenly that few of the artists who made them could ever have seen the gods
themselves.
Brushing his own stubborn hair out of the way again, he held the fragment of a face
close to his nearsighted eyes for a long time, tilting it this way and that, turning it around,
and trying to think of why it could be so enormously valuable. Sal had been willing to
give her life to see that it got to where it was meant to go.
The expression on the god's face, the boy at last decided, conveyed a kind of
arrogance. Definitely there seemed to be an expression, despite the fact that he was
looking at only about a sixth or a seventh of a whole countenance.
When Jeremy stroked the fragment with his callused fingers, it produced a pleasant
sensation in his hands. Something more, he decided, than simply pleasant. But faint, and
almost indescribable. An eerie tingling. There had to be magic in a thing like this. Real
magic, such as some folk had told him wistfully was gone from the world for good.
The sensation in his hands bothered him, and even frightened him a little. Telling
himself he couldn't spend all his time just looking at the mask, Jeremy stuffed it back
inside the pouch and put the pouch again into his shirt, where it lay once more against his
ribs, seemingly as inert as a piece of leather.
Time to think of something else. He kept wondering, now that the sun was up again,
if the flying devils with their poisoned whips were combing the river's shores and all its islands, if they would be back at any moment, looking for him.
Well, if they were, there wasn't much he could do about it, besides traveling at night
-but maybe he could do a little more. There was no use continuing to let his hair grow
long when he had left behind him the village full of people the growth was meant to
challenge. With some idea of altering his distinctive appearance, to make any searchers'
task a little harder, he unsheathed Sal's knife and slashed off most of his hair, down to
within a couple of finger widths of his scalp. Actually using the knife made him admire it
more. He thought that a man would be able to shave with a blade like this-his own face
still lacked any whiskers to practice on.
Despite its hard-edged keenness, the blade was nicked in places and the point slightly
blunted, as if it had seen hard use. There were traces of what Jeremy decided had to be
dried blood. Probably she'd used it as a weapon, against some beast or human-she'd
never talked to him about the struggle she must have been through before they met.
Struck by a new idea, Jeremy now squatted on the riverbank and scooped up handfuls
of thick black mud, with which he heavily smeared the top of his head, down to the
hairline all around. Most of the stuff dripped and slid off, but enough remained to cover
pretty thoroughly what remained of his hair. He could hope that flyers, or men in boats,
who came searching for a redheaded youth would be deceived if they saw him only from
a distance. A worm came wriggling out of his mudpack to inch across Jeremy's face, and
abstractedly he brushed it away.

He'd been hoping that the wounds inflicted by the fury would bother him less as the
day advanced, but the opposite turned out to be true. He took some comfort from the fact that so far he seemed to have no fever. The stinging wounds had fallen where he couldn't
see them, but he once more explored them with his fingers.
Both legs of his trousers were slit in back, horizontally, where the second and third
whip blows had landed. All three of his wounds were almost impossible for him to see,
but his fingers could feel welts, raised and sensitive, as well as thin crusts of dried blood,
scabbing over beneath the holes slashed in the homespun fabric of shirt and trousers.
Well, he'd had a good look at Sal's wounds and thought these were not as bad. He didn't
have anything to use for bandages, unless he tore pieces from his shirt or trousers-but
then bandages really hadn't done Sal any good.
The boy dozed for a while, then woke again in the heat of the day, with the sun not far
from straight overhead. Jeremy helped himself to a drink, straight from the river, and then
decided to go into the water, hoping to soothe his lash marks. He'd have to emerge from
under the sheltering willows to reach water deep enough to submerge himself up to his
neck, but he thought it unlikely that anyone would notice his presence, as long as he
allowed only his head to show above the surface.
As he started to pull off his shirt, the pouch holding the mask fragment fell out on the
grass. The pouch, no longer sewn tightly shut, came open, and the irregular glassy oval
popped briskly out of it, like something with a will of its own, announcing that it declined
to be hidden.
Delaying his cooling bath, Jeremy sat down naked on the grassy bank, dangling his
feet in the water, and once more picked up Sal's peculiar legacy. He wondered if some
kind of magical compulsion had come with it. He'd be forced to keep on studying the
thing, until ...
Until what? Jeremy didn't know.
There seemed no reason to think the piece was anything but what it looked like-a
fragment that had been torn or broken from a mask or from a statue, maybe in some village shrine. But who'd ever seen a statue made of material like this?
A mask, then? Maybe. The jagged edges argued that the object had once been larger,
and certainly this one piece wasn't big enough to serve as even a partial mask-no one
could hope to hide his identity by covering one eye and one ear. Anyway, there was no
strap, no string, no way to fasten it on a wearer's face.
Besides, what would be the point of wearing a transparent mask? The import must be
purely magical. The visible interior flow, as of water, wasn't enough to obscure his
fingers on the other side. Well, he'd never seen or heard of a transparent statue either.
The more he handled the thing, the more of a pleasant tingling it sent into his fingers.
On a sudden impulse Jeremy carried the shard down to the back of his right leg,
where he stroked it tentatively, very gently, along the slash mark of the fury's lash. Even
when he pressed a little harder, the contact didn't hurt but soothed.
Presently Jeremy lay back on the grassy bank with his eyes closed. Raising one leg at
a time, he stroked some more, first giving the injury on the back of the right leg a
thorough treatment, then moving to the left leg. The medicine, the magic, whatever it
was, was really doing the wounds some good. After a minute or so he thought the swollen
welts were actually getting smaller, and certainly the pain was relieved. Presently he
shifted his attention to the sore place on his shoulder and enjoyed a similar result.
Magic, no doubt about it. ... Jeremy's nerves knew hints, suggestions, of great
pleasures, subtle and refined, that the thing of magic sent wandering through his body. ...
There was one more place he wanted to try ....
But even as he indulged himself his mind kept wandering, jumping from thought to
thought. Sal's lash marks had been worse than his, and she'd been carrying this very
thing of magic with her, all during the very worst of her suffering. So why hadn't she
used it to heal her injuries, or save her life, or even to ease her pain? That was something
to puzzle over. She must have known more about it than he did, which was almost nothing at all.
Now, even in the midst of growing pleasure, the troubling notion came to Jeremy that
the exotic joys evoked by the shard were not meant to be experienced by the likes of him
-or at least it was somehow wrong for them to be obtained so cheaply. Because Sal was
involved.
Certainly she hadn't given him her treasure to use it for this purpose. What would she
think if she could see what he was doing now?
Shivering as with cold, feeling vaguely guilty of some indefinable offense, Jeremy
pulled the object away from his body and held it at arm's length.
No. This-this thing-which was Sal's great gift to him, had to be dealt with
properly. With respect.
The magic had helped his back and his injured legs. Whatever helped him to heal now
would help him achieve his sworn goal. What other worthy purpose might he find for
powerful magic?
Well, he couldn't eat the thing if he tried-his fingers could tell that it was far too
tough to chew. But now when he tried holding it against his belly, his hunger pangs were
soothed just as the pain of his wounds had been.
Suddenly the glassy eye reminded him of the spectacles he'd once or twice seen old
folk wearing. Once more, as on almost every day of his life, Jeremy had the thought that
doing what he had to do would be a hell of a lot easier if he could only see. Anything that
might help him in that regard was worth a try.
Carefully, eagerly, Jeremy lifted the translucent oval toward his face again, holding it
at first at a level slightly higher than his eyes. Yes, his earlier impression had been right.
The world really did have a different look about it when seen through the mask's single
glassy eye.
Suddenly hopeful, convinced that at least he was going to do himself no harm, Jeremy brought the fragment close against his nose and cheek, pressing it tight against the skin of
his face, trying to seat it there more snugly. At first the results were disappointing. His
left eye now peered into a field of vision even more wildly blurred than usual. It was like
looking through some kind of peephole. It would be marvelous not to have to be
nearsighted any longer. If he could just get the distance between his own eye and the
crystal pupil exactly right, he might be able to-
A moment later, the boy let out a half-voiced scream and jumped to his feet, heedless
of the fact that his involuntary leap had carried him splashing knee-deep into the river.
Because the object, Sal's treasure, was no longer in his hands. It had attacked him
like a striking snake. He hadn't seen what happened, because it had been too close and
too quick to see. But he'd felt it. Sal's thing of magic had melted in his fingers, dissolved
into liquid as quickly as ice thrown into a fire-and then it had disappeared.
The damned thing was gone, dissolved away-but it had not run down his arms and
body toward the ground. No, instead of streaming along his skin to the earth, it had run
right into his head. He'd felt it go there, penetrating his left eye and his left ear, flowing
into his head like water into dry sand. The first shock had been an ice-cold trickle,
followed quickly by a sensation of burning heat, fading slowly to a heavy warmth. ...
The warmth was still there. Clutching at his head with both hands, Jeremy went
stumbling about in the shallows, groaning and whimpering. There was a long moment
when his vision and his bearing blurred and he knew with dreadful terror that he was
dead.
But maybe, after all, some god was looking out for him. Because here he was, still
breathing, and his body showed no signs of having sustained any damage. At the moment
he couldn't see at all, but he soon realized that was only because he had his eyes covered
with his hands. His feet and legs just went on splashing, until he stumbled to a halt, still
in water up to his knees.

Slowly Jeremy spread his trembling fingers and peeked out. Yes, he could still see.
Whatever the damned thing had done, it hadn't killed him. No, not yet. Maybe it wasn't
going to.
His three savage lash marks once more throbbed with pain, because of all his jumping
around-still they did not hurt nearly as much as they had before Sal's magic touched
them. His head still felt-well, peculiar.
For what seemed to Jeremy a very long time, he just stood there, right below the
grassy bank, almost without moving, knee-deep in mud and water. Gradually he brought
his empty hands down from his head and looked at them and felt another slight increment
of reassurance.
Something alien had entered his body by speed and stealth, trickling right into his
damned head, and it was still there. But these were his familiar hands. He could still do
with them whatever he wanted.
He tried to tell himself it had all been some kind of trick or an illusion. What he'd
thought was happening hadn't really taken place at all. Slowly, slowly, now. Stop and
think the problem out. He could almost hear his father, trying to counsel him.
All right. The piece of ... whatever it was, wasn't in his hands now. It wasn't
anywhere where he could see it.
One moment he'd been pressing it firmly against his face. In the next moment, it was
gone.
So, it had sure as all the hells gone somewhere. Magical treasures, of great value,
didn't just cease to exist.
Raising empty hands again, the boy squeezed fists against his temples. Again he
reassured himself that there was no pain in his head, and by now even the sensation of
liquid warmth had faded. Whatever had happened hadn't hurt him. Something of a funny
feeling persisted, yes, very subtle, deep in behind his eyes, where he'd thought he'd felt the thing establishing itself. But ...
But other than that, everything seemed practically back to normal. Yes, he could hope
that he had been mistaken, after all.
Abruptly Jeremy crouched down in the water, moving on hands and knees. Now he
was getting the cool bath he'd started out to take, but he didn't care what it felt like,
because he wasn't doing it for amusement or relief from the day's heat or even to soothe
his injuries. All those things had been forgotten. All the boy's attention was concentrated
on searching the muddy bottom with feet and hands, working his way in a semicircle
through the opaque brown water beside his private beach, groping for the missing object.
Of course the mask fragment-if that was what it was-being light in weight, might
easily have been carried some distance downstream by a normal current. But the current
at this point, right on the flank of the island, was only a gentle eddy, actually turning and
swirling upstream insofar as it moved at all.
And Jeremy's memory kept prodding him with the fact that there had been no splash,
not even a small one, when the damned thing ran out of his hands and disappeared. Even
a tiny pebble made some kind of splash. No, the thing he was concerned about could not
have fallen into the water at all.
Panting with new fear and exertion, he paused in his muddy, desperate search, then
after the space of only a few heartbeats plunged back into it, splashing and gasping. But
he knew now that he was doing it only as a duty, so he could tell himself later that he had
done everything possible to make sure.
At last he came to a halt, eyes closed again, panting for breath, standing waist-deep in
the river, leaning his body against the stern of his canoe, most of whose length was firmly
grounded.
He knew quite well where Sal's treasure had gone, where her precious, priceless bit of
magic was right now. Because he had felt it going there. It was just that he didn't want to let himself believe the fact or have to put it into words.
Not even in his own mind.
The answer was in his own head.
He had no choice but to believe it, because when he opened his eyes again, new
evidence was at hand.

