Chapter Three

Again, as Jeremy hurried about his work, he had the sensation of being watched. But
he saw and heard nothing to support the feeling. Everyone in the village was busy as
usual, preoccupied with work, the busy harvesttime of midsummer-Uncle Humbert had
explained how the variously mutated varieties of grapes came to maturity in sequence
and disasters might befall them unless they were tended and harvested in exactly the right
way.
The ruts in the village's only street still held puddles from last week's rain. Half a
dozen small houses lined each side. Half the menfolk went fishing in the river Aeron,
sometimes hauling in freshwater clams. The shells were sold by the ton to carters, who
carried them off to the cities, to be cut up by craft workers and polished for use as
decorations, bought by folk who could not afford more precious metals, jewels, or ivory.
Now and then a pearl appeared, but these of the freshwater kind were only of minor
value.
The next time Jeremy returned to the little patch of woods where Sal lay nested he
traveled most of the way along the riverside path. This brought him right past the local
riparian shrine to Priapus, a squat figure carved in black stone, who seemed to be
brooding over his own massive male organs, and to Dionysus, whose tall, youthful form
was carved in pale marble, handsomely entwined with ivy and other vines. Beside the
taller god crouched a marble panther, and he held in his left hand his thyrsus staff, a rod
with a pinecone at the end. His right hand was raised as if to confer a blessing upon
passersby. A fountain, an adjunct to the main well of the village, tinkled into a small pond
at the stone gods' feet.

Starting some twenty yards from the shrine, piles of clamshells, separated by irregular
distances, lay along the bank, waiting to be hauled away by boat or by wagon. The meats,
mottled black and white like soft marble, in warm weather quickly beginning to rot, were
hauled up the hill by barrow to fertilize the vines and hops and vegetables. Pushing a
barrow filled with clam meats, as Jeremy had learned early in the summer, was a stinking
job, beset by many flies, much worse than hauling grapes.
When days and weeks of the growing season went by without adequate rain, which
had happened more than once since the beginning of summer, Jeremy and others filled
kegs and barrels with river water and pushed and dragged them up the hill. Uncle
Humbert's vineyard was comparatively high on the slope.
Today those villagers not toiling in the vineyards were out in their boats fishing.
Some kind of seasonal run of fish was on, and the general scarcity of people in the
vicinity of the village during the day made it easier for a fugitive to hide nearby without
being noticed.

Suddenly, as a result of his responding to a whispered cry for help, a great weight of
responsibility had descended on Jeremy's shoulders. Now, for the first time in his life,
someone else was totally dependent on him. But what might have been a great problem
was, in effect, no burden at all. Because suddenly life had a purpose. The only problem
was that he might fail.
Sal said to him: "This puts a great burden on you, Jeremy."
He blinked at her. "What does?"
"Me. I depend on you for everything."
"No!" He shook his head, trying to make her understand. "I mean, that's not a problem."

***

The boy had just scrounged up some food, which his client attacked with savage
hunger. Her mouth was still full when she said: "My name is something you need not
know." His hurt must have shown in his face, for immediately she added: "It's for your
own good. And others'. What you don't know you can never tell."
"I'll never tell!"
"Of course not!" She put out her hand to gently stroke his. Somehow the touch
seemed the most marvelous that he had ever known. He was touched by the fact that her
hand was smaller than his. He could feel the roughness of her fingers, as callused as his
own.
"I see you can be trusted." And she had turned her head again to favor him with that
look, on which it now seemed that his life depended.
Before he could find any words to answer that, there came a noise nearby, a scurrying
among dead leaves, making them both start, but when the sound came again they could
tell that it was only some small animal.
Jeremy settled down again beside her, still holding her hand. As long as he sat here,
he would be able to hold her hand. "Who hurt you this way?" he whispered fiercely.
"Who is it that's hunting you?"
"Who? The servants of hell. Lord Kalakh's men. If I tell you who isn't hunting me,
the list will be shorter." She bestowed on Jeremy a faint, wan smile and sighed. "Yet I've
done nothing wrong."
"I wouldn't care if you had!" he burst out impulsively. That wasn't what worried him.
What did concern him was a new fear that she might be growing feverish, delirious. He
dared to feel her forehead, an act that brought only a vague smile as reaction from the
patient. Yes, she was too warm. If only there were someone he could call upon for help.
... About all that he could do was bring more water and a scrap of cloth to wet and try to
cool her forehead with it.
When Jeremy saw the young woman again, Sal in her feverish weakness increased
her pleas and demands to be taken or sent downriver. She was determined to go soon, if
she died in the attempt. Jeremy tried to soothe her and keep her lying still. Well, he was
going to take her where she wanted to go; that was all there was to it.
The very worst part of the situation now was that Sal's mind seemed to be wandering.
Jeremy feared that if she really went off her head, she might get up and wander off and do
herself some harm. And there was a second problem, related to the first: he couldn't tell if
she was getting stronger or weaker. She had refused his offer to try to find a healer for
her, turned it down so fiercely that he wasn't going to bring it up again. He had to admit
that if she was determined to keep her secrets, she was probably right.
Several times, in her periods of intermittent fever and delirium, Sal murmured about
the seven. As far as Jeremy could make out, this was the number of people who were
involved with her in some business of life-and-death importance. Then she fell into an
intense pleading with one of the seven to do something. Or, perhaps, not to do the
opposite.
Almost half of what Sal babbled in her fever was in another language, like nothing
that Jeremy had ever heard before. He could not understand a word.
When she paused, he asked: "Who are the seven?"
Sal's eyes looked a little clearer now, and her voice was almost tragic. "Who told you
about that?"
"You did. Just now. I'm sorry if I-"
"Oh god. Oh, Lord of the Sun. What am I going to do?"
"Trust me." He dared to put his hand on her forehead and almost jerked it away again,
the fever was so high.
She shook her head, as if his vehemence had pained her. "I have a right to carry what
I'm carrying. But I can't use it. If only I were worthy."
To Jeremy it sounded almost as if she thought he was accusing her of stealing
something-as if he'd care, one way or the other. Sal was his, and he was hers; she
trusted him. "What is this thing you're carrying that's so important? I could keep it for
you. I could hide it."
Sal drew a deep breath, despite the pain that breathing seemed to cause. "What I bear
with me ... is a terrible burden. Mustn't put that burden on you. Not yet."
The suggestion that she might not trust him as utterly and automatically as he trusted
her struck him with a sharp pang of anguish.
His hurt feelings must have been plain in his face. "No, dear. My good Jeremy. All the
good gods bless and help you. Wouldn't be safe for you to know ... "
He couldn't tell if she meant not safe for him or for the secret. Her fever was getting
worse again. She had started to wander, more than a little, in her speech.
Still there were intervals when Jeremy's new comrade's mind was clear. In one of
those intervals she fiercely forbade him to summon anyone else to her aid.
He nodded. "That's all right. I can't think of anyone around here that I'd trust. Except
maybe the midwife; but you're not pregnant ... " He could feel his face turning warm
again. "I mean, I don't suppose ... "
Sal smiled wanly at that. "No, I'm not. Thank the good gods for small favors at least."
When she paused, he asked: "Who are the good gods?"
Sal ignored the question, which had been seriously meant. "Don't tell the midwife
anything. She can't do anything for me that you can't do."

Presently Jeremy left Sal, whispering a promise that he would be back as soon as
possible, with more food.
For several hours he continued working at his routine tasks, with a private fear
growing in him, and a tender excitement as well. He tried to keep his new emotions from
showing in his face, and as far as he could tell he was succeeding.
And then there were hours, hours terrible indeed for the lonely caretaker, when her
mind seemed almost entirely gone.
At first he could not get Sal to tell him just where her goal downriver was. But soon,
under stress, she admitted that she had to get a certain message to someone at the
Academy.
Coming to herself again, and as if realizing that she was in danger of death, Sal
suddenly blurted out a name. "Professor Alexander."
"What?"
"He's the man, the one you must take it to if I am dead."
"Your secret treasure? Yes, all right. Professor Alexander. But you won't be dead."
Jeremy was not quite sure whether Professor might be a given name or some kind of title,
like Mayor or Doctor. But he would find out. He would find out everything he had to
know.
"He's at the Academy. Do you know what that is?"
"I can find out. A sort of school, I think. If you want to give me-"
"And if he ... Professor Alexander-"
"Yes?"
"If he should be dead, or ... or missing-"
"Yes?"
"Then you must give it to ... to Margaret Chalandon. She is also ... very worthy."
"Margaret Chalandon." Carefully he repeated the name. "I will."

"What I carry is ... "
"Is what? You can tell me."
" ... is so important that ... but if only I were worthy .... "
Still Sal maddeningly refused to tell her savior exactly what the thing was or where it
might be. It couldn't be very big, Jeremy thought. He'd seen almost every part of her
body in recent hours, while trying to do the duties of a nurse. Certainly there was no
unseen place or pocket in her clothing with room enough for anything much bigger than a
piece of paper. Jeremy thought, Maybe it's a map of some kind, maybe a list of names. He
kept his guesses to himself.
"Jeremy."
"Yes, Sal."
"If you should get there, and I don't ... then you must give him what I will give to
you."
"Yes."
"And tell him ... "
"Yes."
"Seven of us were still alive ... at the end. We did all we could. Split up, and went in
different ways. Make it hard for them to follow."
"You want me to tell him, Professor Alexander, that you went in seven different ways
and you did all that you could."
"That's enough. It will let him know ... Jerry? Do your friends call you Jerry?"
"When I had friends, they did."
And either Sal really wanted to hear her rescuer's life story or Jeremy wanted so
badly to tell it to her that he convinced himself she wanted to hear it.
But with her breathing the way she was and looking at him like she did, he soon
broke off the unhappy tale and came back to their present problems. "Sal, I'll carry the thing for you now, whatever it is. I'll take it to one of the people you say are worthy. I
remember their names. Or I can hide it, somewhere near here-until you feel better. No
one will ever find it."
"I know you would ... Jerry. But I can't. Can't put it all on you. I'm still alive. I'm
going to get better yet. Tomorrow or the next day we can travel." She hesitated and
seemed to be pondering some very difficult question. "But if I die, then you must take it."
Helplessly he clenched his fists. It seemed that they were going round and round in a
great circle of delirium. It was impossible to be cruel to her, search her ruthlessly,
impossible to take from her by force whatever it might be. "But what is it?"
Still something, some pledge, some fear, kept her from telling him. Unworthy.
"Can't you even show it to me?"
She had to agonize over the decision for some time. At last she shook her head. "Not
yet."
"Sal. Then how can I -? " But he broke off, thinking that she was delirious again.

Late that night, Jeremy lay in the damp warmth of his cramped loft, listening to a
steady rainbeat on the roof above and trying to sleep on the folded quilt that generally
served him as both bed and mattress. Whatever position he assumed in the narrow space,
at least one slow trickling leak got through the decaying shingles and managed to make
wet contact with some part of his body. He had thrown off his clothes-being wet was
less bother that way-and was fretfully awake. Tomorrow the going with his
wheelbarrow would be slow and difficult, both uphill and down, the steep paths
treacherous with mud.

Tonight he was doubly tired, with urgent mental strain as well as physical work. It wasn't
girl pictures in his mind or even the cold dripping that was keeping him awake. Rather it
was the thought of Sal just lying out there, wounded, in the rain. If there were only
something, anything, like a waterproof sheet or blanket, that he could borrow or steal to
make even a small rainproof shelter for her ... but he could think of nothing rainproof in
the whole village. Some of the houses had good solid roofs-but he couldn't borrow one
of those. Ordinary clothes and blankets would be useless, soaking up the water and then
letting it run through.
Briefly Jeremy considered sliding out the window to lie on the shed roof. Exposing
himself fully to the rain, he could at least share fully in Sal's distress. But he quickly
thrust the idea aside. Adding to his own discomfort would do her no good at all. In fact,
he had better do the very opposite. He had to get whatever sleep he could, because he
needed to think clearly. Tremendous problems needed to be solved, and Sal was in such
bad shape that by tomorrow she might not be able to think at all.
And she was depending on him. Absolutely. For her very life-and she was going to
depend on him, for something else that seemed to mean even more than life to her. He
must not, must not, fail her. Fiercely he vowed to himself that he would not.
Well, the air was still warm, she wouldn't freeze, and at least she would not go thirsty.
Also, the rain would tend to blot out whatever trail she might have left, foil whatever
efforts might be in progress, even now, to track her down.
And maybe the drenching would cool her fever. At least that was some kind of a hope
he could hang onto. Enough to let him get a little sleep at last.

***

The next day, when he at last felt secure enough from observation to get back to his
client, he was vastly relieved to see that Sal had survived the rain. Though her mind was
clear now, she was still feverish, and he cursed himself for not being able to provide her
shelter or find her some means of healing.
But she would not listen to his self-abuse. "Forget all that. It's not important. Maybe
-listen to me, Jeremy-maybe you'll have to do something more important. More than
you can imagine."

Jeremy had been trying for days now to devise plans for getting control of a boat
without letting the owner know within a few hours that it had been stolen. But he could
think of nothing; the only way was just to take one and go. Getting Sal to the river
unobserved would be somewhat chancier. He decided that shortly after sunset would be
the best time. Leave early in the night, and neither he nor the boat would be missed till
after dawn; and travelers on the river left no trail.

Sal's most troublesome wound was on her upper thigh, almost in her crotch. To
Jeremy, who had grown up in one small village after another, places where everyone
generally bathed in the river, the plain facts of female anatomy were no mystery. In some
ways his care of Sal became almost routine. The sight of her nakedness under these
conditions did not arouse him physically-rather, he was intensely aware of a new surge
of the fierce pride he had begun to feel in being Sal's trusted friend and confederate.

She looked, if anything, more feeble now than she had been two days ago; when Jeremy
pulled her behind some bushes and helped her stand, she still could not walk for more
than about two steps. He knew he wasn't strong enough to carry her for any meaningful
distance, at least not when her injuries prohibited rough handling. He had dug a series of
small holes for her to use as a latrine when he was gone.
So far the village dogs had been tolerant of the alien presence they must have scented
or heard from time to time, but Jeremy feared they would create a fuss if he tried to help
Sal move around at night. The boy considered bringing the dogs over, one at a time, to
introduce them to her where she lay hidden, but he feared also that someone would notice
what he was doing. He and Sal would just have to avoid the village as they made their
way to the riverbank.
When he was helping her with the bandage again he dared to ask, "What ... what did
this to you?"
"A fury-did you ever hear of them?"
He was appalled. "A flying thing like a giant bat? A monster like in the stories?"
"Not as big as in some of the stories. But just as bad." She had to pause there.
"Why?" he whispered in dreadful fascination.
"Why bad? Because it's very real."
He stared at the very real wounds, the raw spots wherever two lash marks intersected,
and tried to imagine what they must feel like. "I've never seen one."
"Pray that you never do. Oh, if I were only worthy!" The way she said the word
endowed it with some mysterious power.
"Worthy of what?"
She heard that but wasn't going to answer. Turning her head, trying uselessly to get a
good look at her own wounds, Sal observed calmly: "These aren't healing. I suppose
some of them would be better off with stitches ... but we're not going to try that."

Jeremy swallowed manfully. "I'll steal a needle and thread and try it if you want. I've
never done it before."
"No." She was not too ill to mark the awkward turmoil in his face when he looked at
her. "I don't want you to try to sew me up. Just tie the bandage back. It will be fine ...
when I get downriver. Poor lad. Do you have a girlfriend of your own?"
He shook his head, carefully pulling a knot snug. "No. Is that better now, with the
bandage?"
"Yes, much better." She managed to make the words almost convincing. "You will
make an excellent physician, someday. Or surgeon. If that's what you want to be. And an
excellent husband, I think, for some lucky girl."
He made an inarticulate sound. And cursed himself, silently, for not having the words
to even begin to tell Sal what he felt. How could she say something like that to him?
Some lucky girl. Why couldn't she see how desperately he loved her?
But of course for him to talk about, think about, loving her was craziness. A woman
as beautiful and capable as Sal undoubtedly had a husband or, at least, a serious lover.
Hell, she'd have her pick of grown-up, accomplished, handsome men. Successful
warriors, great men in the world. They would naturally be standing in line, each hoping to
be the one she chose.
Presently-putting out a hand to touch him on the arm-she asked Jeremy, "What do
you want to be?" And it seemed that the question was important to her, taking her for a
few moments out of her own pain and thoughts of failure.
Again Jeremy discovered that he had an answer ready, one that needed no thought at
all. "I want to be someone who works at whatever kind of thing it is that you're doing.
And help you do it. Spying, or whatever it is. That's what I'm going to do."
"You are doing that, Jeremy. Doing it already. Serving my cause better than you
realize. Better than some tall bearded men I know, who .... " Once more she let her words trail away, not wanting to say too much.
Suddenly Sal, as if feeling a renewed urgency, again sharpened her demands that he
help her out of her hiding place in the thicket and into a boat of some kind. And then she
must be taken-or sent on her own, though she feared she would never be able to lift a
paddle on her own-downriver.
"Sure I can get us a boat. Whenever you say the word. Rowboat or canoe, either one."
One or two people had canoes, for fast trips to nearby relatives or markets. "I'll take you.
Downriver where?"
"Have you heard of a place called the Academy, Jerry?"
"I've heard the name. You already told me that the people we want are there. The
worthy ones."
"Do you know what it is? Think of it as a kind of school. A school for people who are
... well, about your age or older. Some of them much older. It's near a city called Pangur
Ban, if you know where that is. Where the great river joins the sea."
Jeremy nodded. "I've heard that much. Back when I lived in my own village. People
said it was like a school for grownup people."
"Yes. That describes it about as well as ... Jeremy. Jeremy, my love, pay close
attention. I thought ... if I stayed here and rested ... but I'm not getting any stronger.
Mind's clear right now, but actually weaker. Got to face that. Don't know if I'm going to
make it down the river. It might be you'll be the only one alive when ... No, hush now;
listen .... So I have to tell you things. And ask you to do a certain thing, if it should
happen ... if things should work out so that I can't do it myself."
"Yes." Jeremy, my love. She'd really, truly, said those very words. To him. With his
head spinning, he had to make a great effort to be able to hear anything else she said after
that word.
She kept on trying to warn him. Between her breathless voice and her wandering mind she was not succeeding very well. She continued: "What I want you to do ... is
dangerous."
As if that could make any difference! At the moment he felt only a bursting contempt
for danger. "I'll do it. Tell me what it is."
Sal looked at him for what seemed a long time. He could almost see how the fever
was addling her brains. To his despair, at the last moment she seemed to change her mind
again. "No. I'd better not try to explain it all just yet. Maybe tomorrow."
It made him sick to realize the fact that Sal's mind was once more drifting, that she
was getting worse.
For the first time he had to confront head-on the sickening possibility that she might
die, before he could take her where she wished to go. The thought made him angry at her
-what could he possibly do, how could he go on with his own life now, if Sal were
dead?

**

That night, supper in the shabby little house was fish and oatmeal once again. For
some reason there were no raisins-he could begin to hope that Aunt Lynn had grown
sick of them herself. Jeremy took an extra piece of fish and when no one was looking hid
it in his shirt, to take to Sal tomorrow.
Sitting at the table across from the two aging, gap-toothed strangers who happened to
be his childless aunt and uncle, the boy found himself looking at them as if this were his
first night at this table. Again he wondered how he had ever come to be there in their
village, in their house, eating their oatmeal. The arrangement could only have come about
as the result of some vast mistake. A cosmic blunder on the part of the gods, or whoever was in charge of arranging human lives.
On impulse, while the three of them were still sitting at supper, Jeremy brought up the
subject of the Academy, saying that some passing boatman had talked about it.
Aunt Lynn and Uncle Humbert heard their nephew's words clearly enough. But in
response they only looked at him in silence, displaying mild interest, as if he'd belched or
farted in some peculiar way. Then they turned away again and sipped their water and
their wine. Evidently neither of them felt any curiosity on the subject at all.
Presently Uncle Humbert began to talk of other things, on subjects he doubtless
considered truly practical. Among the other jobs Jeremy would be expected to do in the
fall, or in the spring, was somehow conveying water uphill to irrigate the vines on their
sunny slopes.
"Mutant vines, you got to remember, Jer, and they need special treatment."
"I'll remember."
Jeremy found himself wishing that he could steal his uncle's boat, since it seemed that
he would have to take someone's. But as a vinedresser, only occasionally a winemaker,
not really a fisherman, Humbert had no boat.
It was next day at sundown when Jeremy's life, his whole world, changed even more
suddenly and violently than on the day of his parents' death.

He was walking with studied casualness toward the place of rendezvous, bringing Sal
a few more scraps of smuggled food, when his first sight of a fury, throbbing batlike
through the air, coming at treetop height in his general direction, threatened for a moment
to paralyze him. Sal's enemies have come, to kill her and to steal her treasure.

In the distance, just beyond the last house of the village, he saw and heard a strange man,
mounted on a cameloid, shouting orders, telling creatures and people to find "her."
Suddenly the darkening sky seemed full of furies, as black and numerous as crows.
