Chapter Eight

The night that followed was one that Jeremy would remember for the rest of his life.
Because on that night he first saw the stars.
All day he had been keenly aware of his improved eyesight. In fact, long minutes
passed when he could hardly think of anything else, and so he later told himself that he
ought to have anticipated the commonplace miracle. But he was still distracted by grief
and heavily occupied most of the time with the problems of immediate survival. So it was
that the first pure point of celestial light, appearing just as the sun was going down, took
him completely by surprise. Until that moment, the contents of the sky had been the
furthest thing from his thoughts.
And then, marvelously, the stars were there.
Somehow the boy was surprised by the fact that the revelation was so gradual. Very
soon after that first startling, soul-piercing point at sunset, there came another twinkle, in
a different part of the sky. And presently another. In a little while there were dozens,
eventually hundreds. The onset of the multitudes, the thousands, which required hours to
reach its full development, cost him time on his journey, holding him openmouthed and
marveling for a long time when he might have been paddling.

On each succeeding night Jeremy hoped for a clear sky and looked forward with keen
anticipation to the celestial show. More often than not he had his wish. Also, the events of
one night began to blur into those of another, and so it went with the sleepy days as well, as a kind of routine established itself in his journey downstream. Sal's bequest had
markedly improved his left eye's ability to distinguish shapes in darkness, which helped
him avoid snags, sandbars, and islands. But now he often lost time by forgetting to
paddle, in his sheer wonderment at the stars.
Each day at sunrise he beached his canoe in the most sheltered spot that he could find.
He had begun his journey fully intending to count the days of its duration. But when three
had passed, he began to wonder whether the true number might be four. From that time
on, his uncertainty grew. But when he considered the situation carefully, he supposed it
didn't matter much.
His daytime slumbers continued to be enlivened by dreams of the strange, newly
vivid kind, sometimes erotic and sometimes not. In them the nameless, beardless, dark-
haired youth frequently appeared, usually unclothed, but sometimes wrapped in a white
robe secured by a golden clasp. Always he played a commanding role. Sometimes he
casually strangled furies, beckoning to them, willing them to fly near him, so that they
were compelled to come, like moths around a flame. Then, smiling, he would snatch
them out of the air, one at a time, and wring their necks like so many helpless pigeons,
while Jeremy, the silent witness, silently cheered the slaughter on.
Sometimes, in other dreams, the Nameless One effortlessly seduced young maidens.
And not only girls but older women, too, females in all colors and sizes, some of races
Jeremy had never seen before. Many of their bodies were lovelier than he had ever
imagined the human form could be, and the shapeliest of them behaved in wanton and
provocative ways, making the boy groan in his sleep.
And there were dreams in which the Dark Youth remained apart from human contact,
his fingers plucking at his seven-stringed instrument-a device whose counterpart in
waking life the dreamer's eyes had never seen-producing fast rhythms to which the
women danced. These were followed by haunting melodies to which no one could dance that seemed to have nothing to do with the body at all but stayed with Jeremy long after
he had awakened. In these episodes it seemed that the musician sang, but Jeremy could
never hear his voice.
And in one memorable dream the Nameless One had put away the instrument of
seven strings, along with all thoughts of music and of soft amusement. Now he looked a
head taller than before, his beardless face hard as stone, his white cloak rippling with
what might have been a savage wind. He was standing on a field of battle, wearing on his
back a quiver filled with arrows, clutching in his powerful left hand an archer's bow that
seemed to be made from-of all things-silver. As Jeremy watched, awestruck, his
dream companion raised his bare right fist and swung it against a towering stone wall,
while hundreds of human soldiers who had been sheltering behind the barrier took to
their heels in panic. Some of the soldiers were too slow to run away, and their little
human bodies were crushed by falling stones. The thunder of the toppling wall awoke the
dreamer to a summer storm of lightning.

During Jeremy's waking nighttime hours, while he kept paddling steadily downriver
under the entrancing stars (he had identified two constellations, enough to make him
confident of which way was north), his thoughts continued to revolve around the question
of how he was to carry out the sacred mission entrusted to him by Sal (by Sal who had
called him by the name of love!). How was he ever to accomplish that now, when the
magic thing that he was supposed to deliver had vanished into his own head?
One unwelcome possibility did cross his mind. Suppose that when he located one of
the people for whom the magic thing was meant, that person would have to kill the unhappy messenger in order to retrieve the treasure?
Well, so be it, then. Jeremy's current mood was appropriately heroic and abandoned.
He would do anything for Sal, who had set him free and given him the stars.
Contemplation brought him to one truth at least, which was that everyone he'd ever
really cared about was dead. He had to fight against bleak intervals of despair. In an effort
to distract himself from endless mourning, he set himself certain mental tasks. One
challenge was to recall every word that he had ever heard about the city of Pangur Ban
and the Academy, which lay somewhere nearby. It seemed hard to believe that he was
really traveling to such places, and yet he had no choice. And trying to remember what he
had heard about them was futile, because he had never heard more than a dozen words or
so. He would just have to learn what he needed to know when he got there.
In his entire life the boy had heard people speak of the Academy not more than two or
three times, and always as part of a catalog of the accomplishments of Lord Victor
Lugard, who ruled at Pangur Ban. But those few sentences, spoken in awe and wonder,
about matters that the speaker did not pretend to understand, had created in the boy's
imagination a place where might be gathered all the wise folk of the world, and where an
explanation for the mysteries of the world could be available.

Early one morning, two days after Sal's mysterious prize had vanished into his head,
Jeremy was much mystified when he caught sight for the first time of a mysterious
towering shape on the horizon. It was certainly miles away; how many miles he could not
try to guess.
And somehow he knew just what it was. The answer came rising unbidden out of some newly acquired depth of memory.
Everyone had heard of the Mountain of the Cave. Halfway up its slopes, at a point
perhaps a mile above sea level, the Cave of the Oracle opened a supposed entry to the
Underworld and offered a shrine where rich and poor alike might hope to have their
futures revealed to them, might truly be told which road to take to find success. The first
time Jeremy's vision showed him that strange shape was near dawn, when he was just
about to head in to shore for the day. The first sight of the strange high ridge, with its top
shrouded in even stranger clouds, shook him, brought him up short paddling.
What in all the worlds? And yet he had no need to ask the question. The boy stared,
letting the canoe drift. He squinted-this was fast becoming a habit with him-and tried
closing first one eye, then the other.
The distant Mountain stood well off to the north and west, so that the river in its
gentle windings, tending generally west and south, never carried him directly toward it.
In fact, there were times when he was being borne in the exactly opposite direction.
When he experimentally closed his left eye, the Mountain's distant image disappeared
entirely, swallowed up in sunglare and horizon haze and, of course, the chronic blur of his
nearsightedness.

During the afternoons late summer storms sometimes produced hard rain. On these
occasions, if the opportunity offered, Jeremy dragged his canoe entirely up onshore and
overturned it, creating a shelter beneath which he contrived to get some sleep. Anyway,
getting wet was no real problem as long as the weather remained warm.
Sometimes now, at night when he thought he was making good headway toward his invisible goal (though getting somewhat farther from the Mountain), keeping wide awake
beneath the stars, Jeremy had a renewed impression that he was no longer traveling alone.
His Watcher companion was with him now.
Sal had warned him that the Academy was hundreds of miles distant and that the
journey downriver would take many days. She had started to coach him on the exact
location of her goal, but they hadn't got far enough with that to do him any good now. He
soon gave up trying to estimate how far he had come since leaving his uncle's village-
and by now he had definitely lost count of the number of days in his downstream journey.
He regretted not having started a tally of scratches on a gunwale with Sal's knife.
At about this time he noted that his canoe had begun to leak, though so far only
slightly; so far he could manage, with a little bailing by hand two or three times a night.
Being run aground every morning, sometimes on rough shores, wasn't doing the wooden
bottom any good. He could of course try to steal another boat along the way, but the theft
would leave a mark of his passage, and he had little doubt that those who had hounded
Sal to her death were now after him.

Back at the Raisinmakers' village, in sight of the twin shrines of Dionysus and
Priapus, extensive interrogation was in progress. Magicians in the employ of Lord Kalakh
were active-and had already set up an image of their master, stern and ageless-looking,
with bulging eyes, by which they meant to keep themselves in tune with his will. This
despite the fact that neither Lord Kalakh nor his chief lieutenants had much faith in
magicians.
Gods, now, were a different matter altogether.

His Lordship had impressed upon this crew of raiders, before dispatching them, the fact
that in recent months the goodwill of at least one faction of the gods had been shown to
be essential to any human being who took the quest for power seriously. And since Hades
had already shown himself victorious, it was with Hades that Lord Kalakh meant to ally
himself.
Questioning, most of it rather stressful, had been proceeding steadily. The surviving
inhabitants of Uncle Humbert's village had been counted, along with their dead, and the
survivors questioned as to who had been in the village but could not now be accounted
for.
The body of the woman who had been carrying the Face was readily identified-but
of the treasure itself there was no sign.
As it happened, both of Jeremy's relatives had survived and made no difficulty about
telling the questioners whatever they could about their unhappy nephew. It was a shame
if the lad had managed to get himself in some deep trouble, so that powerful folk had to
put themselves to the trouble of coming looking for him, but it was a hard world, and
there was nothing to be done about it.
Another of the villagers thought that the lad named Jeremy had been one of those
carried off by the harpies.
"There were no harpies here," the officer corrected sternly. "Nothing that flew here
was big enough to carry anyone."
The villager had to admit the likelihood of error.
There was also the possibility that the boy Jeremy Redthorn had been drowned while
trying to get away; there was no evidence one way or another on that. At least two boats
were missing, but in the confusion accompanying the attack some might have simply
drifted away.

***

The body bore old, half-healed fury whip marks as well as fresh ones. The villagers
all stared in wonder at the dead servant of a defeated god, and none of them would admit
to ever seeing her alive.
The body had already been stripped and all the clothing and possessions that might
have been the woman's subjected to the closest scrutiny. The officer assigned to conduct
the last stage of the search had no scruples about opening her head with knife and hatchet
and probing gorily about inside the skull. In the normal course of events a Face would
eject itself when its wearer died-but no possibility must be overlooked. "And of course
if she had been wearing the Face we want, instead of carrying it ... " The speaker, a junior
officer in Kalakh's Special Forces, let his comment die away.
His colleague was ready to complete it for him. "Unlikely she'd be lying there now.
Or that anyone as small as we are would be opening her skull," he finished dryly.
From the last stage of the search the man who'd undertaken it looked up a moment
later, his hands stained with fresh gore but empty. "No, sir, nothing."
"Damn all in Hades's name!" The junior officer looked around him, at ruin and ashes,
soldiers and moping villagers, a planted field and a patch of forest. "Possibly this missing
Redthorn does have it with him-or she may have hidden it somewhere nearby. We must
search the entire area-kill no more of these people. It will be necessary to interrogate
them all over again." He paused. "If this missing youth does have it-well, which way
would you flee, Carlo, if you were trying to get away from here in a hurry? Downstream,
of course."

***

Now the river was carrying Jeremy past larger villages, here and there a sizable town,
amid an increasing traffic of sailboats and barges. Now, even with superb eyesight, he
began to have trouble locating places to lay over during the day, spots along the shore
where he might hope to pass the daylight hours entirely unobserved. Perhaps, he thought,
at this distance from Uncle Humbert's village it no longer mattered if people noticed him.
But the fury's lash marks were still sore-though a little less each day- and he still felt
hunted.
It was hard to keep himself from looking again and again under the thwarts of the
canoe, in hopes of finding another chunk of stale corn bread, on the possibility that
another might have miraculously appeared. Now and then, drifting near dawn or sunset,
while his stomach growled with hunger, the fugitive yearned to catch some fish, but he
lacked the means of doing so. The little cache did contain flint and steel to make a fire,
but in this season he had no need of extra warmth.
He had heard of some folk who claimed magic, the power to compel fish to come
within reach of their grasping hands and submit like pet animals to being flipped out of
the water. Others, who could do the trick as well, said that no magic was involved.
Jeremy in his hunger tried to make the thing work for himself, gave it a try without really
believing it would work-and sure enough, whether it was magic he still lacked or only
skill and patience, it didn't.
One night, two hours before dawn, driven by hunger to take serious chances, he
decided to raid the henhouse of an isolated farm whose buildings, atop a wooded bluff a
little inland from the river, showed up plainly enough in silhouette against the stars.
Roots and berries were only maintaining him on the brink of starvation. If he ever
hoped to dine on chicken, on fresh meat of any kind, he would probably never see a
better opportunity than this.
Tying his boat up loosely, in readiness for a quick getaway, he stepped ashore and padded his barefoot way inland as quietly as possible. The complication he had feared
most, an alert watchdog, soon came to pass; the animal gave a few preliminary growls
when Jeremy was still some thirty yards away, even though the boy had taken the
precaution of approaching from downwind.
Under his breath Jeremy muttered oaths and blasphemies against a variety of gods. At
least the dog had not yet barked. Grim determination had grown in him; he was too
hungry to give up. Anyway, he had known for a long time that the worst thing you could
do when faced by a dangerous animal was turn around and run.
Drawing Sal's businesslike little knife and holding it ready for a desperate defense,
Jeremy stuttered out some low-voiced nonsense, meant to be soothing. To his joy and
surprise, the attempt was an immediate success. The mammoth dark shape of a long-
haired dog came jostling right up to him, but with a reassuring tail wag and not growling,
only whining as if to entreat a favor. A wet nose nuzzled at his hand. Having sheathed his
knife again, Jeremy spent a minute standing in a cold sweat of relief, scratching the
grateful, panting beast behind its ears. Then he resumed his progress toward the
henhouse. His new friend was content to follow a step or two behind. Obviously the dog
was taking a benign interest in his affairs, with the air of a guide standing by to do a favor
if requested.
Every few steps the starving two-legged marauder paused to glance toward the small
darkened farmhouse. But everything there remained as quiet as before.
In the stable a dromedary snorted, a long groaning snuffle, and shuffled its feet inside
its stall. But that was all.
Moving cautiously in deep shadow, with the dog still companionably at his side,
Jeremy approached the henhouse, only to find it surrounded by a tall fence, obviously
meant to keep intruders out as well as hold chickens in. The barrier consisted of thin
vertical stakes bound together with a network of tough withes and cordvines, the spaces between the stakes too narrow to admit even the body of a chicken. There was a gate
leading into the enclosure, but unhappily for the boy's purposes it was fastened at the top
with a kind of lock, and on top of that was an oddly shaped device that appeared to be a
kind of metal box.
And now Jeremy started nervously and almost began to run. With his left ear (but not
with his right, he thoughtfully observed) he could hear the box making a ghostly clamor,
which grew louder when he stood on tiptoe and stretched out a hand toward it.
Looking over his shoulder, the apprentice chicken thief beheld the house still dark
and silent. The dog beside him was quite unperturbed. Gradually the boy allowed himself
to believe that the noise existed nowhere but in his own left ear.
And with that belief came understanding: he had just received, through his mysterious
silent partner, a timely warning-the contraption was precariously balanced, and he
supposed it was designed to make a racket if it was disturbed. When he began to unwind
the cord, it produced a loud rattling sound.
Reluctantly he gave up on the gate and moved away, but his hunger would not let him
abandon all hopes of chicken dinner. Sliding along the fence, peering in through the thin
palings from one new angle after another, the boy half-absently resumed the whispering
that had already served him so well this night.
"C'mon, hens-one of you anyway-how 'bout a nice fat one? Or you could just
send me out some eggs, if you don't ... " His voice trailed away, as his jaw dropped.
A sleepy bird, white-feathered and as young and plump as any thief could wish, had
hopped down off its roost somewhere in the dark interior and now came stalking out of
the henhouse, directly toward him. In another moment the chicken was right beside the
fence and fluttering high enough for Jeremy, who had forced a lean arm between the
stakes, to grab it by the neck, turning fowl into food before it could utter a single squawk.
Even as he performed the act, he recalled in a vivid flash of memory a dream in which with this same right hand (yet not entirely the same) he had exerted about the same
amount of effort and strangled a fury.
He could ponder dreams some other time, after hunger had been stayed. Right now he
lifted the dead chicken, wings and feet still beating, near the top of the fence, to a position
where he could reach over the top with his other hand and grab it.
On leaving the farmyard, with his dinner-to-be in hand, he found it necessary to
quietly discourage the watchdog, who was whining and wanting to come with him. When
Jeremy was a hundred yards away, he could hear the animal howling its regret at his
departure.
At the moment he was too engrossed in his hunger to try to reason out what had just
happened. Still, he took the time to move his boat downstream another quarter-mile or so,
just in case the farmer, wondering what the hell was wrong with his dog, grew suspicious
and came looking around.
Established at last in a modest riverside encampment, protected from onshore
observation by the riparian thicket where he'd tied his boat, Jeremy busily plucked
feathers and beheaded and gutted and cleaned the bird with Sal's sharp knife. By now the
eastern sky had grown sufficiently light to let him see what he was doing.
Starvation had not yet reached the point where he would try to eat a chicken raw. But,
in order to roast the fowl, he was going to have to make a fire.
And damn it all, this was naturally the time for his bad luck to take another turn. Try
as he might, the flint and steel refused to work. Somehow everything must have got wet
again. To make matters worse, all the tinder he could find was damp from a recent rain.
Even on the bottom of such logs and fallen branches as he could find. It seemed he'd
have to wait, his stomach growling, until some hours of sunlight had dried things out.
Fumbling and cursing, Jeremy at last gave up the futile attempt to strike a spark. Then
he squinted as the first direct rays of sunlight came striking in over the water to hit him in the face.
Fire? You want fire? Plenty of it, right there in the sky ... if only it might be possible
to borrow just a little of that ... if only he had a burning glass.
A moment later, when he looked down at the wood and tinder in front of him, he was
startled. Suddenly his left eye had begun to show him a small, bright spot, like a sharp
reflection of the sun, right on a piece of kindling. At last the boy cautiously reached out a
hand and touched the spot. He could feel nothing there but the dull, unreflective wood ...
except that the wood felt warm!
This called for investigation.
Jeremy soon discovered that when he sat with his face in direct sunlight and squinted
down at an angle, focusing the gaze of his left eye on the tinder he had arranged, a spark
of white light flared at the spot he'd picked. When he maintained the direction of his gaze
for half a minute, the white light began to generate a small orange glow that he could see
with both eyes. A wisp of whitish smoke arose.
And presently, having added some more of the dampish twigs and grass and wood, he
had a real fire, one hot enough to dry more stuff for it to burn and big enough to roast his
chicken, after he'd impaled it on a green stick. Carefully he kept turning the fowl around,
and soon delicious smells arose. In his hunger, he began tearing off and eating pieces of
meat before the whole bird was cooked.

When he had satisfied his belly for the time being, Jeremy tried again to raise fire
from the sun, just for the hell of it and got the same result. Nothing to it. Now the feat
was even easier than be-fore-maybe, he supposed, because the sun was getting higher in the sky and hotter.
Having thrown chicken bones, feathers, and offal into the river, he sat picking his
teeth with a splinter and thinking about it while he watched the fire that he had made in
wood die down. By all the gods! It just beat anything that he had ever seen. He had been
given magic in his eye, all right.
For the first time in what seemed years, Jeremy began to consider new possibilities of
fun.
Eventually he lay back and drifted into musing over what powers the mask piece
might have given him that he hadn't even discovered yet.
Of course there were nagging questions, too. Why would a chicken and a dog be
compelled to listen to him, to do what he wanted, when a fish in the river was not? But
the questions were not enough to keep him from dozing off into a delicious sleep.

His journey went on, day by day. And still, by day and night, though not so frequently
now as at the beginning of his flight, Jeremy anxiously looked upstream for pursuing
boats and scanned the sky for furies. Eventually the idea at least crossed Jeremy's mind
of someday trying to burn a fury out of the sky by concentrating sun glare fatally upon it.
Only in dreams could he-or the Dark Youth-summon up strength enough to wring
their necks, but it would give him great satisfaction, in waking life, to at least mark some
of those great gray wings with smoking spots of pain, send them in screaming flight over
the horizon. But as a practical matter he had to admit that the damned things would never
hold still long enough for him to do that. Such fire raising as he could do now with his
eye was a slow process.

On a couple of occasions he'd seen a burning-glass in operation, and this was much the
same thing. But ... his eye?
Of course, the eye endowed with such power didn't seem to be entirely his, Jeremy
Redthorn's, any longer.

In succeeding days, the traveler managed to feed himself reasonably well. Partly he
succeeded by helping himself to more fruit, both wild and cultivated. Strawberries were
easy to find. Apples, peaches, and cherries came from orchards along the shore, melons
from a vine-strewn field. Jeremy's left eye outlined for him, in subtle light, certain
pathways, certain objects, indicating where the harvest would be profitable. Several times
he dared prowl close enough to houses to dig up carrots and potatoes out of kitchen
gardens. Coming upon some wild grapes, Jeremy tried them, too, and enjoyed them,
though he'd thought he'd lost his taste for grapes of any kind long months ago. These had
a sharply different flavor from the special doomed-to-be-raisins variety that Uncle grew
and of which the boy had hauled so many loads.
But his special vision was of no help at all in gathering that which grew independent
of cultivation. Something there to think about-but he didn't know what to think.
And in the nights that followed he repeated his feat of chicken stealing, several times,
with growing confidence and consistent success. Minor variation brought him a goose on
one night, a turkey on another. Soon starvation ceased to be a real fear, and so did
watchdogs-he might have had a whole pack of them, eager to join him on his journey,
had he wanted to encumber himself with such an escort.
Whenever he had sunlight or even when clouds were no worse than a light overcast, he could make a fire. He tried bright moonlight once and thought he might have
succeeded had he had the patience to persist long enough.

During late afternoons, while he lay ashore waiting for darkness to bring what he
hoped would be safe travel time, Jeremy amused himself by borrowing the sun's last
energies with his left eye, to burn his initials into the wooden side of his beached canoe.
He hadn't really thought about the matter before, but of course there were several
different ways to make each letter of the alphabet- there, for example-JAY-TEE-in
cursive. And there were other styles of making letters ... other languages, of course.
How many of each category could he call to mind? Too many, he realized, feeling a
faint chill at heart. Far more than Jeremy Redthorn, in half a dozen years of simple
village schooling, had ever learned. There were some people, his new memory recalled,
living about five hundred miles over that way, who made their letters in this style.
Meanwhile a certain tribe dwelling a long, long way over in the opposite direction wrote
down their words in entirely different characters. And meanwhile, way over there, at a
truly enormous distance, on the far side of the great round world-
He sat back on the ground beside his boat and sighed.
Yes, of course the world was round. And amazingly large. He didn't know when or
how he'd gained the knowledge, but so it was. Now he could see it in his new mind's eye
as the planet Earth. Dimly he could evoke the shape of continents and oceans. Names of
distant places, cities, countries, oceans, lakes, and rivers. Might his parents have told him
such things, years ago, shown him a globe? He couldn't remember them doing anything
like that.

But they might have, yes, of course. They might have taught him some of all this, but not
all.
How much of all this had he really learned in the school in his home village?
He couldn't remember any teacher, or his parents, actually telling him any of these
things.
On the other hand, he now had a firm awareness that globe models of the world
definitely existed. Along with many, many elaborate maps. Even if there hadn't been
anything like that in his old village school. The Academy had them, and so did a thousand
other seats of knowledge, places of learning, scattered around the world.
Now, every time Jeremy turned his thoughts in a new direction, he discovered his
memory freshly stocked with dozens, hundreds, perhaps thousands of facts, likely and
unlikely. One discovery in this enormous warehouse tended to lead to another, until it
seemed that a whole cascade, an avalanche, of facts and words and images was about to
come pouring down on his head, burying him from sight. It sometimes frightened him to
think of all the things he might now find, in his own mind, if he really tried. Things that
had been newly stuffed into his head, without his knowing-
Stop it, he sternly warned himself.
And yet it was impossible to entirely stop the wondering, the inward search. The
freshly loaded cargo of information was in place, as impossible to ignore as were the
powers of sex, now that his body had grown into them. His mind was compelled to keep
teasing and worrying at the edges of the vast, the unbelievable, oversupply of memories
and knowledge.
Of course, all this had come to him as a result of Sal's great gift.
But what good was it all going to be to him?
How, for example, could Jeremy Redthorn, who'd spent the entirety of his short life
in a couple of tiny and obscure villages, possibly have any idea of the teaching tools with which the Academy was equipped? Yet so it was. And if Jeremy tried, he could call up a
rather hazy image of the place, many white stone buildings with red tile roofs. He could
even see, as if in old and hazy memory, some of the people there and how they went
about their business.
Jumping to his feet, he paced back and forth on the small strip of sheltered island
beach he'd chosen for his current resting place. Around him, the world was bigger than
he'd ever imagined it might be-and he could sure as hell see more of it.
Maybe he should think about girls for a while and pass the time that way. It was damn
sure time to think about something besides the thing, the god mask or whatever it was,
that had poured itself like liquid into his head.
He was afraid that his new memory could tell him exactly who that Face belonged to
and what its presence was going to do to its human host-but he feared the answers too
much to dare to frame the questions.

