Chapter Seven

A tremendous change indeed had come upon him. The simple fact was that now he
could see, which meant that his left eye, having been treated to a dose of Sal's magical
melting ice, was now functioning, showing him things in a way that he had to believe was
the way human eyes were meant to work.
Turning his head to right and left, looking upstream and down, Jeremy confirmed the
miracle. No more mere smears of brown and green. Now he could not only count the
trees on the far bank but easily distinguish individual leaves on many of their branches.
And miles beyond that, so far that it took his breath away, he could make out the precise
shapes of distant clouds.
Again Jeremy had to fight to regain control over himself. He was still standing in
waist-deep water at the curved stern of the canoe, gripping the wood of the gunwale in an
effort to keep from shaking. In this position he kept closing his eyes and opening them
again. In spite of his improved vision, fear still kept him hoping and praying, to every
god that he could think of, for the thing that had invaded his body to go away. But there
was not the least sign that his hopes and prayers were going to be fulfilled.
Even at the peak of his terror, the glorious revelation of perfect sight shone like a
beacon. At last there came a moment when he could forget to be terrified.
Drawing a deep breath, Jeremy insisted that his body cease its shaking. The effort was
not totally successful, but it helped.
Now. He wasn't going to go on playing around here in the shallows, like a child
making mud pies. It was pointless to go on looking for something that was not there.
Finally he admitted to himself that the fragment of some unknown divinity's face was somewhere inside his head. He'd felt the thing invade his skull, and the reality of that
staggering experience was being steadily confirmed by the transformation in his vision.
Concentrating on that change, he began to realize that it went beyond enabling him to
see distant things. Now in his left eye the whole world, near objects as well as far, was
taking on a distinctly different aspect from the familiar scene as still reported by his other
eye in its half of his visual field.
And belatedly Jeremy began to realize that his left ear was no longer functioning in
quite the same way. His hearing had always been normal, so the change wrought in it was
not as dramatic as that in his vision-but an alteration had definitely taken place. Some
sounds as he perceived them on his left side were now underlain by a faint ringing, a
hollow tone, like that resulting from water in the ear-but again, it wasn't exactly that.
Gently he pounded the heel of his hand against the sides of his head, first right, then
left, but to no effect.
He wasn't quite sure whether his hearing on the left was actually improved-but
possibly it was. The situation wasn't as clear-cut as with sight.
Time passed while the boy's pulse and breathing gradually returned to normal. He
was still standing waist-deep in water, clinging to the boat, but the invasion of his body
appeared to be producing no additional symptoms. Eventually Jeremy stopped shaking,
and eventually he was able to force himself to let go of the canoe-only when his fingers
came loose did he realize how cramped they had become maintaining their savage grip.
Rubbing his hands together to get some life back into them, he waded slowly ashore,
where he stood on the riverbank dripping, naked-anyone watching would be certain he
wasn't carrying any mysterious magical object-and waiting for whatever might be going
to happen to him next.
What came next was a renewed surge of fear and worry. Despairingly Jeremy
thought: I had it, Sal's treasure, right here in my hands, and now I've lost control of it. Like a fool I pushed it right up against my face, and right into ...
Never mind all that. All right, he knew quite well where the damned marvelous thing
had settled. But just stewing about it wasn't going to do him any good.
The reassuring belief remained that Sal-well, Sal had at least liked him. She
wouldn't have played him any dirty tricks. No. Sal had-well, she'd called him love that
one time. At least once. He really couldn't stand to think of the most that might have
meant-but yes, at least she'd liked him, quite a lot.
And the precious object she'd lost her life trying to save had now become a part of
him, Jeremy Redthorn. Of course that wasn't what was supposed to happen.
Possibly what he'd just done-what had just happened-meant he had already failed
in the mission for which she'd given up her life. But no, he wouldn't stand for that. He'd
still fulfill his promise to her-if he could.
Even if he still had not the faintest idea of what the treasure really was, what it really
meant.
Slowly Jeremy pulled on his wretched clothes again. As usual, the coarse fabric of his
shirt scraped at the lash mark on his back. But that injury, like those on his legs, was
notably less painful than it had been an hour ago. And it was really not possible for him
to go without clothes all the time. At least during the day, he had to protect the parts of
his hide not already deeply tanned and freckled. Already weakened by his lash marks and
by hunger, the last thing he needed was a case of sunburn.
Once more the boy became absorbed in testing the miracle of his new vision, closing
one eye at a time. Each trial had the same result. The world as seen through his left eye,
especially in the distance, now looked enormously clearer, sharper in detail. Certain
objects, some trees, bushes, a darting bird, displayed other changes, too, subtle alterations
in shape and color that he would have been hard put to describe in words.
When he grew tired of these experiments, the sun was still high above the shading willows. He had decided to stick to his plan of waiting for nightfall before he pushed off
in the boat again. Meanwhile, he really needed more sleep. All emotions, even fear, had
to give way sometime to exhaustion.
Jeremy lay back on the grassy bank and closed his eyes. This made him more fully
aware of the change in his left ear, which kept on reporting new little differences in the
everyday events of the world around him. Whenever wavelets lapped the shore nearby or
a fish jumped in the middle distance, there came hints of new information to be derived
from the sound. His left ear and his right presented slightly different versions of the
event. Not that he could sort it all out just yet. In time, he thought, a fellow might learn to
listen to them all and pick out meaning.
It crossed Jeremy's mind that this might be the way a baby learned about the world,
when sight and hearing were altogether new.
He had to try to think things through ... but before he could think any more about
anything, he fell asleep.
His slumber was soon troubled by a dream, whose opening sequence might have
placed it in the category of nightmare, except that while it lasted he remained curiously
without fear. In fact all the action in the dream took place with a minimum of emotion.
He dreamed he was beset by a whole cloud of airborne furies, even larger than life-size,
as big as the harpies that his waking eyes had never seen. Huge bat-shaped forms came
swirling round him like so many gigantic screaming mosquitoes. But somehow the
situation brought no terror. Instead he knew the exquisite pleasure of reaching out,
catching the neck of one of the flying monsters in the grip of his two hands, fully
confident of being able to summon up, in his hands and wrists, a sufficiency of strength
to wring its neck. In fact, the action was almost effortless on his part. The physical
sensation suggested the familiar one of chicken bones crunching and crumbling.
Then abruptly the scene changed. No more nightmare monsters. Now Jeremy was presented with an image of his lovely Sal and was overjoyed to realize that she was not
dead after all. What had seemed to be her death was all a horrible mistake! She wasn't
even wounded, not so much as scratched, her face not even dirty.
Jeremy's heart leaped up at the sight of her wading toward him, thigh-deep in the
river, dressed in her familiar clothes-the only garments he'd ever seen her wear, but
now new and clean instead of torn and dirty.
She was smiling directly at him-at her friend, her lover, Jeremy. And Sal was
beckoning to him. She wanted him to come to her so the two of them could make love.
Love. Her lips were forming the word, but silently, because the Enemy, the unknown and
faceless Enemy, must not hear.
Jeremy-or was he really Jeremy any longer ?- seemed to be drifting, disembodied,
outside himself. He was observing from a little distance the male youth who stood
waiting onshore while the young woman approached. He who had taken Jeremy's place
deserved to be called a young man rather than a boy, though his smooth cheeks were still
innocent of beard. He, the other, was casually beckoning Sal forward, with his
outstretched right arm, while under his left arm he was carrying a stringed musical
instrument of some kind.
He, the newcomer, stood a full head taller than Jeremy, and the boy knew, with the
certainty of dream knowledge, that this other was incomparably wiser and stronger than
himself. The nameless stranger was dark-haired, his nude body muscular and very
beautiful. Plainly he was in total command of the situation. His beckoning fingers
suggested that he was masterfully controlling every detail of Sal's behavior.
And something utterly horrible was about to happen ...
... and Jeremy was jarred awake, his mind and body wrung by nightmare terror, a fear
even beyond anything that the actual presence of the furies had induced in him.
He sprang to his feet and stood there for almost a full minute, trying to establish his grip on waking reality. When at last he had managed to do so, he collapsed and lay on the
ground in the shade of the willows, feeling drained, his whole body limp and sweating in
the hot day. Gradually his breathing returned to normal.
Overwhelmed by fantastic memories, he struggled to sort them out, to decide what
had really happened and what he had only dreamed. No girl, no Sal or anyone else, had
really come wading out of the river to him. And no dark youth stood on the bank now.
He, Jeremy, was completely alone ... or was he?
Suddenly confusion gripped him, and he thought in panic: What had happened to the
treasure Sal had entrusted to him? Something of transcendent importance, having to do
with some god ... it had come loose from inside his shirt. ... Only after some seconds of
frantic groping and fumbling did he remember where it was now.
He sat on the grass with his head in his hands. How could he have forgotten that,
even for a moment? But it was almost as if that strange invasion of his body had
happened to someone else.
And Sal had kept saying she was unworthy. If so, what about Jeremy Redthorn? Yes.
Of course. But that had been before. Now, things were different. Whatever sacrilege had
been involved was now an accomplished fact. The worthiness of Jeremy Redthorn was no
longer of any concern-because Jeremy Redthorn was no longer the same person.

Taking stock of himself, Jeremy noted additional changes. The lash marks were
notably less painful than when he'd fallen asleep-how long ago? Surely less than an
hour. There were still raised lumps, sore to the touch-but no worse than that. Otherwise
he felt healthy, and there was no longer any trace of fever.

And there was yet another thing. ... Somehow the experience of the last hour had left him
with the impression that he was not alone.
But not even his improved vision or hearing could discover anyone else with him on
the island.
He had the feeling that there was a Watcher, one who kept just out of sight while
looking continually over Jeremy's shoulder. But who the Watcher was or why he or she
was observing him so steadily the boy had no clue.
Also, the feeling was gradually growing on him that he had been used by some power
outside himself. But he did not know exactly how or for what purpose.
Presently he stirred and got up and stripped and went into the water again, with a
sudden awareness of being dirty and wanting to be clean. Meanwhile he noticed that his
body had become a nest of various unpleasant smells. Probably it had been that way for a
long time-and what in all the hells had made him think putting mud in his hair would be
of any use in deceiving his pursuers? He did his best to soak it out. He couldn't remember
exactly when he'd last had a real bath, but he badly needed one now and found himself
wishing for hot water and soap. And maybe a good scrub brush. But he would have to
make do with the cool river. He brought his garments into the water and did what he
could to wash them, too.
Swimming a few lazy strokes upstream, then floating on his back and drifting down,
he gradually regained a sense of reality. Here he was in his own body, where he belonged,
as much in control of all its parts as he had ever been. His sight had been changed by
Sal's thing of magic-changed for the better-and his hearing was a little different, too.
And that, as far as he could tell, was all. Sal hadn't been killed or hurt by carrying the
thing around with her. Other things, not this, had destroyed her.
And the dream he'd just experienced was only a dream. He'd had others not too
different from it. Except for the part about strangling furies, of course. And then the utter terror at the end ....
Well ... all right. This last dream had been like nothing else he'd ever experienced.
Around the boy floating in the water the drowsy afternoon was still and peaceful, the
sun lowering, sunset not far away.
Looking through his left eye at the sun, he beheld a new and subtle fringe of glory. At
first he squinted tentatively, but then it seemed to him that his new eye could bear the full
burden of the world's light without being dazzled, without dulling a bit of its new
keenness when he looked away. Not his right eye, though; that was no better than before.
Despite the exquisite terror with which the dream had ended, he didn't want to forget
it and wasn't going to. The bit about killing furies had been good, but not the best. No,
the best part-even though it, too, frightened him a little-had been when Sal was
beckoning to him from the water and for one glorious moment he had known that
everything was going to be all right, because she was not dead after all.
