Chapter Four

Bounding forward, he reached Sal's side only to crouch beside her helplessly, not
knowing if they should try to hide or take to the river and escape. Her soft voice seemed
unsurprised at the sound and movement beginning to fill the air around them.
"Remember. The first name is Alexander, the second Chalandon." Then suddenly her
expression altered. "Listen -! "
There was a rustling and a gliding in the sunset air, and from directly above them
drifted down a series of soft, strange, wild cries.
Jeremy leaped to his feet, in time to see the second wave of the attack swept in, in the
form of sword-wielding men on pacing cameloids, less than a minute behind the flying
creatures. Jeremy recognized the blue and white uniforms of Lord Kalakh's army-the
people who half a year ago had overrun Jeremy's home village.
Tumult had broken out among the Raisinmakers, with people pouring out of houses,
running to and fro. Jeremy grabbed Sal by one arm and dragged her up and out of hiding.
She was now in full sight of several villagers, but none of them paid any attention.
Jeremy was ready to try once more to carry her, but Sal, driven to panic, tried
desperately to stand and run to the river. She hobbled beside him for a moment, but then
her wounded leg gave way. She was crawling to get away when a swooping fury fell
upon her slashing. Sal rolled over, screaming in agony.
Jeremy grabbed up a stone and flung it at the flying terror, which squawked and
twisted in midair to avoid the missile. When another of the monsters swooped low over
Sal, he hurled himself at it, trying to beat it off with his bare hands. It seemed to him that
he even caught a momentary grip on one of its whips, but the organ slithered like a snake out of his hand, impossible to hold.
Men, women, and children were shouting in the background. Another fury had just
alighted in the top of one of the village shade trees, slender branches swaying under the
startling weight. Another came down on the ground and a third right on the peaked
shingled roof of Uncle's house. A host of similar creatures were swirling, gray blurs in
the background, coming out of the east with the approaching dusk.
Finally Jeremy got a good look at one, holding still in the last sunset light. The
creature's face looked monstrously human, a caricature of a woman's face, drawn by
some artist whose hatred of all women was clear in every line. Actually, male organs
were visible at the bottom of its hairy body.
The creature's great bat wings, for the moment at rest, hung down like draperies.
When once more they stirred in motion, they rippled like gray flags in the wind. Its
coloring was almost entirely gray, of all shades from white to black, and mottled together
in a way that reminded him of the sight of rotting clam meats. And the smell that came
from it, though not as strong as that corruption, was even worse in Jeremy's nostrils.
Even from the place where Jeremy was now crouching over Sal, trying to get her
back on her feet again, the village shrine was visible. Pale marble Dionysus and squat,
dark Priapus were not about to move from their carved positions but stood facing each
other as always, oblivious to what was going on around them. Now their raised wine cups
seemed to suggest some horrible treachery, as if in mutual congratulations on the success
of the attack, the destruction of the villagers who had so long neglected them.
Jeremy had heard that in addition to his more famous attributes, Priapus was a
protector of vineyards and orchards. But his statue here was dead and powerless as the
stone markers in the village burial ground.
Villagers were running, screaming, pointing up at gliding or perching furies. Jeremy
caught a glimpse of Myra, wearing a short skirt like other village girls, standing frozen. On her plain face, framed by her long brown hair, was an expression of perfect shock.
And here came another of the flying horrors toward Sal-
From the fury's taloned birdlike feet and from the fringed wingtips hung the half-
dozen tendrils that served as scourging whips. They snapped in a restless reflex motion,
making a brief ripple of sound. One struck at a small bird and sent it into convulsions.
The fellows of the first attacker, gliding above on wings the size of carpets, screamed
down to it, making sounds that might almost have been words, and it launched itself into
the air again, first rising a few yards, then diving like a hawk to the attack. The screams
that rose up in response were all from human throats.
Someone in the village had found a bow and was firing inaccurate arrows at the furies
as they darted by overhead. Someone else hurled rocks.
Another villager shouted: "Don't do that! A god has sent them."
The man with the bow had time to shout out what he thought should be done with the
gods before a human warrior on a swift-pacing cameloid, decked in blue and white,
lurched past and knocked the archer down with a single blow of a long-handled war
hatchet.
Another blow, from some unseen hand, struck Jeremy down. Senses reeling, he had
the vague impression that Myra had come hurrying in his direction, that she was briefly
looking down at him with concern.
The stranger who had called herself Sal, the woman Jeremy had begun to worship but
had never known, had time to gasp out a few sentences before she sprawled out crudely,
awkwardly, facedown, let out a groan, and died.
Swiftly Jeremy bent over her, grabbed her body and twisted it halfway round, so he
could see her face, her blind eyes looking up at him. When he saw that she was indeed
dead, he twisted his body, screaming out his grief and rage against the world.
The puddle beneath Sal's head was so red with sunset light reflected from the sky that it seemed half of blood, and in the puddle an object that must have fallen from Sal's hand
as she died now lay half-sunken, half-floating. Jeremy instinctively grabbed it up and
found he was holding a small sealed pouch. Again he thought that it must have dropped
from her dying hand, just as she had been on the point of handing it over to him.
Shocked and numbed by Sal's death, only distantly aware of the fire and blood and
screaming all around him, Jeremy stuffed into his shirt the pouch all wet with water and
with her blood. Vaguely he could feel that it contained some irregularly shaped lump of
stuff that clung against his skin with a surprisingly even temperature and softness and,
even through the fabric of the pouch, seemed almost to be molding itself to fit against his
ribs.
There was something that he had to do, an urgent need that must be met. But what
was it? Jeremy's brain felt paralyzed. In his shock it seemed that the world had slowed
down and there was no hurry about anything. In her other hand Sal had been holding the
small knife whose scabbard hung at her belt. The blade, though shorter than Jeremy's
hand, was straight and strong and practical, and very sharp. The handle was made of
some black wood the boy could not have named. Certainly Sal would want him to have
the knife, and after looking to her dead eyes for encouragement he decided to take belt
and all. His waist, he noted dully, was only a little thicker than hers. Kneeling beside the
dead woman, he took the whole belt from her and strapped it on himself.

The flying creatures were stupid by human standards, yet obviously experienced in
this kind of work, good at starting huts and houses ablaze, driving the inhabitants out
where they could get a look at them. They found an open fire somewhere and plucked out brands, using their lash-tentacles almost as skillfully as fingers, and used the bits of
burning wood as torches.
From the moment when he left the house, a minute before the attack began, Jeremy
saw no more of his two relatives-he had no idea whether they had survived or not.
Shaking himself out of his near-paralysis, he concentrated his full energy on an effort
to get himself away.
He cast one more look around him, then rose up running. Before him lay the river,
one highway that never closed, and the escape plan he had at least begun already to
prepare.
The usual complement of villagers' boats were available, tied up loosely at their tiny
respective docks, as well as a few, awaiting minor repairs, hauled bottom-up on shore. A
few more were drifting loose, freed of their moorings in a backwater current, their owners
likely murdered or driven mad in the latest attack. Jeremy saw one human body thrashing
in the water, another bobbing lifeless.
And now the voices of people screaming, under attack, came drifting down from the
high vineyards on the hill above the village.
And the voices of the human attackers, raised like those of hunters who rode to
hounds in the pursuit of wild game. The thud and plash of saddled cameloids' padded,
two-toed feet.
A human warrior on foot was now blocking the approach to the long, narrow dock to
which the boats were tied. But the man was looking past Jeremy and seemed to be paying
him no attention.
Jeremy hit the water headfirst, in his clothes, and struck out hard for the outer end of
the crude pier, where boats were clustered. He'd caught a glimpse of a canoe there,
somehow left bobbing and waiting, instead of being pulled out of the water.
Something struck the nearby water with a violent splash, and he assumed it was a missile aimed at him, but it had no influence on his flight.
Even underwater Jeremy could feel the thing, the mysterious treasure she had given
him, stowed snug inside his shirt, strangely warm against his skin, as warm as Sal's own
living hand had been.
Pulling to the surface for a gasp of air, hoping to find the canoe almost within reach,
he screamed in pain and fright, feeling the slash of one of the furies' whips across the
back of his right shoulder.
