Chapter One

Weeks later, and more than a hundred miles from the Cave of Prophecy, dusk had
ended the day's work for the inhabitants of a quiet riverside village. In a small house on
the edge of the village, three people sat at a table: a gray-haired man and woman and a
red-haired boy who had just turned fifteen. By the dim and flaring light of a smoky fish-
oil lamp the three were concluding an uneventful day with a supper of oatmeal, raisins,
and fresh-caught fish.
This was, in fact, a very minor birthday party. Aunt Lynn had sung Jeremy a song-
and poured him a second glass of wine.
Tonight gray-bearded Uncle Humbert had emptied somewhat more of the wine jug
into his own cup than usual and had started telling stories. On most nights, and most
days, Jeremy's uncle had little enough to say about anything. But tonight the birthday
occasion had been melded with the prospect of a good harvest, now in late summer
already under way. For the latter reason Humbert was in a good mood now, refilling his
clay cup yet again from the cheap jug on the table.
Tonight was going to be one of the rare times when Uncle drank enough wine to alter
his behavior. Not that Jeremy had ever seen his uncle take enough to bring on any drastic
change. The only noticeable effect was that he would start chuckling and hiccuping and
then reel off a string of stories concerning the legendary gods, gradually focusing more
and more on their romantic encounters.
Months ago Jeremy had given up expecting ever to be thanked for his hard work. He
had to admit that the old people worked hard, too, most of the time. It was just the way
things were when you lived on the land.

As a rule, the boy consumed only one cup of wine at a meal. His uncle was stingy about
that, as about much else. But tonight Jeremy dared to pour himself a second cup, and his
uncle looked at him for a moment but then let it pass.
The boy was not particularly restricted in his consumption of wine but so far had not
been tempted to overdo it-he wasn't sure he liked the sensations brought on by
swallowing more than a little of the red stuff straight.
Earlier Aunt Lynn, contemplating the fact of his turning fifteen, had asked him,
"S'pose you might be marrying soon?"
That was a surprise; he wondered if the old woman really hadn't noticed that he was
barely on speaking terms with any of the other villagers, male or female, young or old.
The folk here tended to view any outsiders with suspicion. "Don't know who I'd marry."
Aunt Lynn sat thinking that over. Or more likely her mind was already on something
else-the gods knew what. Now Jeremy sat drawing little circles with his finger in the
spots of spilled wine on the table. Often it seemed to the boy that there must be more than
one generation between himself and the two gray people now sitting at his right and left.
Such were the differences. Now Uncle Humbert, tongue well loosened, was well into his
third tale concerned with the old days, a time when the world was young and the gods,
too, were young and vital beings, fully capable of bearing the responsibility for keeping
the universe more or less in order. Jeremy supposed the old folk must have heard the
stories thousands of times, but they never seemed tired of telling or hearing them yet
again.
Many people viewed the past, when supposedly the gods had been dependable and
frequently beneficent, as a Golden Age, irretrievably lost in this late and degenerate
period of the world. But Uncle Humbert's view, as his nephew had become acquainted
with it over the past several months, was somewhat different. A deity might do a human
being a favor now and then, on a whim, but by and large the gods were not beneficent.

Instead they viewed the world as their own playground and humanity as merely an
amusing set of toys.
Humbert derived a kind of satisfaction from this view of life-it was not his fault that
the world, as he saw it, had cheated him in many ways. Certain of the gods seemed to
spend a good deal of their time thinking up nasty tricks to play on Uncle Humbert.
Jeremy supposed that seeing himself as a victim of the gods allowed Humbert to have a
feeling of importance.
The other half of Humbert's audience on most nights for the past five months had
been his weary, overworked nephew. Tonight was no exception, and the boy sat, head
spinning over his second cup, falling asleep with his head propped up in one hand, both
his elbows on the table. Nothing was forcing him to stay at the table-he could have got
up at any moment and climbed the ladder to his bed. But, in fact, he wanted to hear the
stories. Any distraction from the mundane world in which he spent the monotony of his
days was welcome.
Now Jeremy's eyelids opened a little wider. Uncle Humbert was varying his
performance somewhat tonight. He was actually telling a tale that the boy hadn't heard
before, in the five months that he'd been living here.
The legend that Jeremy had never heard before related how two male gods, Dionysus
and one other, Mercury according to Uncle, who happened to be traveling together in
disguise, made a wager between themselves as to what kind of reception they would be
granted at the next peasants' hut if they appeared incognito.
"So, they wrapped 'emselves up in their cloaks, and-hiccup-walked on."
Aunt Lynn, who tonight had hoisted an extra cup or two herself, was already
shrieking with laughter at almost every line of every story and pounding her husband on
the arm. Silently Jeremy marveled at her. No doubt she had heard this one a hundred
times before, or a thousand, in a quarter-century or so of marriage and already knew the point of the joke, but that didn't dampen her enjoyment. Jeremy hadn't heard it yet and
didn't much care whether he heard it now.
Uncle Humbert's raspy voice resumed. "So great Hermes-some call'm Mercury
-'n' Lord Di'nysus went on and stopped at the next peasants' hut. It was a grim old man
who came to th' door, but the gods could see he had a young and lively wife ... She was
jus' standing there behind the old man, kind of smiling at the visitors ... an' when she
saw they were two han'some, young-lookin' men, dressed like they were rich, she winked
at 'em .... "
Aunt Lynn had largely got over her latest laughing fit and now sat smiling, giggling a
little, listening patiently. She might be thinking that she could have been burdened with a
husband a lot worse than Humbert, who hardly ever beat her. And Jeremy was already so
well grown that Uncle, not exactly huge and powerful himself, would doubtless have
thought twice or thrice before whaling into him-but then, such speculation was probably
unfair. In the boy's experience Uncle Humbert had never demonstrated a wish to beat on
anyone-his faults were of a different kind.
The story came quickly to its inevitable end, with the grim, greedy old peasant
cuckolded, the lecherous gods triumphant, the young wife, for the moment, satisfied.
Judging by Uncle Humbert's laughter, the old man still enjoyed the joke as much as the
first time he'd heard it, doubtless when he was a young and lecherous lad himself. The
thought crossed Jeremy's mind that his father would never have told stories like this-not
in the family circle, anyway-and his mother would never have laughed at them.

That was the last joke of the night, probably because it was the last that Uncle could dredge up out of his memory just now. When all three people stood up from the table, the
boy, still too young to have a beard at all, was exactly the same height as the aging
graybeard who was not yet fifty.
While the woman puttered about, carrying out a minimum of table clearing and
kitchen work, young Jeremy turned away from his elders with a muttered, "Good night,"
and began to drag his tired body up to the loft where he routinely slept. That second cup
of wine was buzzing in his head, and once his callused foot sole almost slipped free from
a smooth-worn rung on the built-in wooden ladder.
Now in the early night the tiny unlighted loft was still hot with the day-long roasting
of summer sun. Without pausing, the boy crawled straight through the narrow, cramped,
ovenlike space and slid right on out of it again, through the crude opening that served as
its single window. He emerged into moonlit night on the flat roof of an adjoining shed.
Here he immediately paused to pull off his homespun shirt. The open air was cooler
now than it had been all day, and a slight breeze had come up at sunset, promising to
minimize the number of active mosquitoes. To Jeremy's right and left the branches of a
shade tree rustled faintly, brushing the shed roof. Even in daylight this flat space,
obscured by leaves and branches, was all but invisible from any of the other village
houses. In a moment Jeremy had shed his trousers, too.
He drained his bladder over the edge of the roof, saving himself a walk to the
backyard privy. Then he stretched out naked on the sun-warmed shingles of the flat,
slightly sloping surface, his shirt rolled up for a pillow beneath his head.
There, almost straight above him, was the moon. Jeremy could manage to locate a
bright moon in a clear sky, though for him its image had never been more than a blur and
talk of lunar phases was practically meaningless. Stars were far beyond his capability-
never in his life had his nearsighted vision let him discover even the brightest, except that
once or twice, on frozen winter nights, he'd seen, or thought he'd seen, a blurry version of the Dog Star's twinkling point. Now and then, when Venus was especially bright, he
had been able to make out her wandering image near dawn or sunset, a smaller, whiter
version of the moon blur. But tonight, though his eyelids were sagging with wine and
weariness, he marveled at how moonlight-and what must be the communal glow of the
multitude of bright points he had been told were there-had transformed the world into a
silvery mystery.
Earlier in the day, Aunt Lynn had said she'd heard a boatman from downriver talking
about some kind of strange battle, supposed to have recently taken place at the Cave of
Prophecy. Whole human armies had been engaged, and two or more gods had fought to
the death.
Uncle had only sighed on hearing the story. "The gods all died a long time ago," was
his comment finally. "'Fore I was born." Then he went on to speak of several deities as if
they had been personal acquaintances. "Dionysus, now-there was a god for you. One
who led an interesting life." Uncle Humbert, whose voice was gravelly but not
unpleasant, supplied the emphasis with a wink and a nod and a laugh.
Jeremy wanted to ask his uncle just how well he had known Dionysus-who had died
before Humbert was born-just to see what the old man would say. But the boy felt too
tired to bother. Besides, he had the feeling that his uncle would simply ignore the
question.
Now, despite fatigue, an inner restlessness compelled Jeremy to hold his eyelids open
a little longer. Not everyone agreed with Uncle Humbert that all the gods had been dead
for a human lifetime or longer. Somewhere up there in the distant heavens, or so the
stories had it, the gods still lived, or some of them at least, though they were no more to
be seen by any human eyes than Jeremy could see the stars. Unless the stories about a
recent battle might be true ...
Others of that divine company, according to other stories, preferred to spend their time in inaccessible mountain fastnesses on earth-high places, from which they
sometimes came down to bother people or befriend them ... At least in the old days,
hundreds of years ago, they had done that.
He wondered if the gods, whatever gods there might be in reality, behaved anything at
all like their representations in Uncle's stories. People who were inclined to philosophy
argued about such matters, and even Jeremy's parents had not been sure. But Jeremy
preferred to believe that there were some gods in the world. Because magic really
happened, sometimes. Not that he had actually experienced any himself. But there were
so many stories that he thought there must be something ...
... his mind was drifting now. Let Dionysus and Hermes come to the door of this
house tonight, and they'd find a crabbed old man, but no young wife to make the visit
worth their while. Neither gods nor men could work up much craving for Aunt Lynn.
From down in the dark house the rhythmic snores of Jeremy's aunt and uncle were
already drifting up. Wine and hard work had stupefied them; and in the real world, what
else could anyone look forward to but sleep?
Weariness and wine quickly pushed Jeremy over into the borderland of sleep. And
now the invisible boundary had been passed. Bright dreams came, beginning with the
young peasant wife of Uncle Humbert's tale, as she lay on her back in her small bedroom,
making an eager offering of herself to the gods. Her husband had been got cleverly out of
the way, and now she wantonly displayed her naked body. Between her raised knees
stood the towering figure of jolly, bearded Dionysus, his muscles and his phallus alike
demonstrating his superiority to mere mankind.
And now, in the sudden manner of dreams, the body of the farmwife on her bed was
replaced by that of a certain village girl about Jeremy's age. Her name was Myra, and
more than once this summer the boy had seen her cooling herself in the river. Each time,
Myra and her younger girl companions had looked their suspicion and dislike at the red-haired, odd-looking newcomer. They'd turned their backs on the intruder in their village,
who spoke with a strange accent. Whichever way Myra stood in the water, however she
moved, her long dark hair tantalizingly obscured her bare breasts and the curved flesh of
her body jiggled.
The boy on the shed roof was drifting now, between sleep and waking. Something
delightful was about to happen.
Well, and what did he care if some ignorant village girl might choose not to let him
near her? Let her act any way she liked. Here, behind the closed lids of his eyes, he was
the king, the god, the ruler, and he would decide what happened and what did not.
And even in the dream, the question could arise: What would Dionysus, if there really
was a Dionysus, do with a girl like Myra? How great, how marvelous, to be a god!
But in another moment the dream was deepening again. The fascinating images were
as real as life itself. And it was Jeremy, not Dionysus, who stood between the raised
knees of the female on the bed. Even as Myra smiled up at him and reached out her arms,
even as their bodies melted into one ...
Groaning, he came partially awake at the last moment, enough to know that he was
lying alone and had spent himself on wooden shingles. Real life was messy, however
marvelous the dreams it sometimes brought.
Less than a minute later, Jeremy had turned on his back again, once more asleep. This
time his dreams were of the unseen stars.