CH APTER

THE BACKGROUND

I. The Patristic Epoch

The object of this book is to sketch the development of the
principal Christian doctrines from the close of the first century
to the middle of the fifth. The choice of these frontiers is not so
arbitrary or artificial as one might at first sight suppose. There
is an obvious convenience in placing the starting-point outside
the New Testament. Not only is its teaching a distinct, highly
specialized field of study, but the difference of atmosphere
becomes immediately apparent as one crosses from the apostolic
to the post-apostolic age. At the other end the council of
Chalcedon (451) saw the curtain drop on the Church's first
great doctrinally creative period. Discussion was far from
being closed; to take but one example, the Christological issue
which Chalcedon had tried to settle continued as a subject of
fierce controversy for generations. But, so far as the central
stream of Christendom was concerned, the brilliant upsurge of
fresh ideas which had distinguished the earlier centuries had
spent itself. By the sixth century, both in East and West, the
reign of formalism and scholasticism was well under way.

If he is to feel at home in the patristic age, the student needs
to be equipped with at least an outline knowledge of Church
history and patrology. Here there is only space to draw his
attention to one or two of its more striking features. In the
first place, he must not expect to find it characterized by that
doctrinal homogeneity which he may have come across at
other epochs. Being still at the formative stage, the theology of
the early centuries exhibits the extremes of immaturity and
sophistication. There is an extraordinary contrast, for example,
between the versions of the Church's teaching given by the

second-century Apostolic Fathers and by an accomplished fifth century theologian like Cyril ofA lexandria. Further, conditions were favourable to the coexistence ofa wide variety ofopinions even on issues ofprime importance. Modem students are some times surprised at the diversity of treatment accorded by even the later fathers to such a mystery as the Atonement; and it is a commonplace that certain fathers (Origen is the classic example) who were later adjudged heretics counted for orthodox in their lifetimes. The explanation is not that the early Church was in different to the distinction between orthodoxy and heresy. Rather it is that, while from the beginning the broad outline of revealed truth was respected as a sacrosanct inheritance from the apostles, its theological explication was to a large extent left unfettered. Only gradually, and even then in regard to comn paratively few doctrines which became subjects of debate, did the tendency to insist upon precise definition and rigid uni formity assert itself.
 Two important dividing-lines cut across the period, the one vertically and the other horizontally. The former is the differ ence of theological temperament between East and West. For historical reasons Rome and the churches immediately associated with her (Gaul, Spain, North Africa, etc.) developed in relative independence of the Eastern churches, and this is reflected in their creeds, liturgies and doctrinal attitude. While Greek theo logians are usually intellectually adventurous and inclined to speculation, their Latin counterparts, with the exception of those subject to Eastern influences, seem by contrast cautious and pedestrian, confining themselves to expounding the tradi tional rule of faith. As an extreme example of this difference we need only juxtapose the conceptions of theology held by (a) Irenaeus and Tertullian, and (b) Clement and Origen, in the latter half of the second and first half of the third centuries. Deeply suspicious of, even hostile to, philosophy, the former limited the function of theology to expounding the doctrines set out in Holy Scripture; they applaudedl the simple believers who were content with the rule of faith. The latter, on the
other hand, went so far as to distinguish two types of Chris tianity, with two grades of Christians corresponding to them. The first and 1ower type was based on faith', i.e. the literal acceptance of the truths declared in Scripture and the Church's teaching, while the second and higher type was described as 'gnosis', ie. an esoteric form of knowledge. This started with the Bible and tradition, indeed was founded on them, but its endeavour was to unravel their deeper meaning, and in the light of it to explore the profounder mysteries of God and His uni verse and scheme of salvation; it was supposed to culminate in mystical contemplation or ecstasy. Thus they divided the faith ful into simple believers, whom they tended to disparage, and 'spiritual' men, 'gnostics' or 'perfect', whom they regarded as specially privileged by God.
 The horizontal dividing line coincides with the reconciliation between Church and Empire effected by Constantine I (306 337), of which the council of Nicaea (325) was the symbol. Prior to this the Church was a persecuted body, struggling to adapt itself to its environment and to fight off such foes as Gnosticism. It is to its credit that, in spite ofall difficulties, it was able to produce great constructive theologians like Irenaeus and Origen. With the accession of Constantine, however, the situation radically changed. Henceforth, except for a brief in terlude when Julian was sole emperor (361-3), the Church was to enjoy the often embarrassing favour of the State. The era of acute ecclesiastical controversy now began, and councils of bishops became the accepted instruments for defining dogma. As a matter of fact, Christian theology was now entering upon its first splendid summer, and the definitions hammered out against this background of controversy and often unedifying rivalries were to prove of lasting value. Because of the importance of this horizontal division, the material in this book has been arranged so as to take account of it.
 Most significant of all, however, is the fact that the Church of the fathers was set in the complex cultural environment of the Roman Empire. This means that, although drawing on its own unique sources of revelation, Christian theology did not take 
shape in a vacuum. The atmosphere in which it had to grow and develop was crowded with religious, philosophical and even theosophical notions. To some of these it reacted violently, by others it was consciously or unconsciously affected. Some degree of familiarity with this environment is indispensable to anyone who hopes to appreciate the evolution ofpatristic thought, and an attempt will be made to supply this in this chapter. The reader should not expect anything like a comprehensive picture of Graeco-Roman culture during the first five centuries. In the following sections a few of the more noteworthy tendencies and movements will be singled out, but even these will only be touched on briefly and in so far as they impinged upon the Church's teaching.
 2. Religious Trends in the Roman Empire
 The world in which the Church made triumphant, if some times painful, headway was hungry for religion. Surviving monuments of every kind testify to the desperate longing, felt by all classes, for assurance against death and fate, redemption from evil, spiritual cleansing, union with God. To meet this need the old classical religions had little to offer. Despite periodical drives (e.g. by Augustus) to revive ancient piety, the gods of Greece and Rome had lost whatever power they had possessed to inspire. The worship of the emperor or his genius, fostered by Augustus and his successors, became increasingly prominent and had official backing. At best, however, it pro vidcd a channel for corporate loyalty and the sense that Provi deuce watched over the Empire. Much more satisfying were the Oriental cults which from the first century before Christ spread rapidly across the Graeco-Roman world. Isis, Serapis and Cybele were the most fashionable divinities, winning masses ofdevotees and having temples erected to them at the public charge; while among soldiers the Persian god Mithras, the ally of the Sun and so the champion of light against darkness, was immensely popular. Syncretism was the product of this mutual jostling of religions; the gods of one country were identified with those of 
another, and the various cults fused with and borrowed from each other indiscriminately. The belief in the immortality of the soul, sometimes linked with the idea of the transmigration of souls taught by Pythagoras (6th cent, b.c .), and in a future judgment leading either to punishment or a blessed life with the gods, was general.
 Two phenomena in this welter of superstition and genuine piety call for notice. First, the extraordinary vogue of the so called mystery religions. This is the name given to those close knit religious groups or fellowships into which newcomers had to be initiated by secret ceremonies (ʻmysteries') not com municable to outsiders. In classical tinmes the mysteries held at Eleusis in honour of Demeter and Persephone were the most famous. The ones that were popular in our period were mostly Oriental in origin. There were mysteries of Isis, and of the great Anatolian mother-goddess Cybele and her youthful lover, the vegetation god Attis, and of others; probably the most wide spread and representative were those of Mithras. All these re ligions had sacred meals, and in the preparatory stages great store was set by abstinences, mortifications and purifications. The rites which formed the climax of their worship were occult actions, involving carefully guarded formulae and cult objects, which imparted an uplifting revelation to the initiate and secured his mystic union with the deity. In the rites of Cybele and Attis, for example, he underwent a kind of baptism in the blood of a bull (taurobolium) or a ram (crioboliutn), which was slain above him,l and as a result felt himself'reborn for ever'. The rites of Isis persuaded him that he had traversed the portals ofdeath itselfand had returned revivified, protected by the god dess upon whom he had gazed face to face.2 The appeal of these mystery religions undoubtedly lay in the satisfaction they could give to the craving for an intense personal experience of the divine, with the accompanying sense of release from guilt and fear.
 Secondly, the growing attraction, for educated and un educated people alike, of a monotheistic interpretation of the 
conventional polytheism. More and more the many gods of the pagan pantheon tended to be understood either as personified attributes ofone supreme God or as manifestations ofthe unique Power governing the universe. The current syncretism made this process easy and natural, and at a higher level it coincided with the trend of enlightened philosophical opinion. The sophist Aristides, who lectured in Asia Minor and Rome in the middle of the second century, provides an instructive example. A series of his speeches survives celebrating individual gods, especially Asclepius, to whom he has a warm, genuine attach ment; but it is ěvident that in his eyes they all represent cosmic forces emanating from the one universal Father. Plutarch, too, the biographer and essayist (fl. 100), while adhering to ancestral religious practices and admitting2 the existence of subordinate intermediary gods and demons, combines this with belief} in a single supreme and perfect God Who is true being. The grow ing use of 'Pantheos, either as an amalgam uniting the char acteristics ofseveral gods or as an adjective attached to the name of one, was symptomatic. When in 274 the emperor Aurelian instituted the state cult of Sol Invictus, he was not merely saluting the sun as protector of the Empire, but acknowledging the one universal Godhead Which, recognized under a thousand names, revealed Itself most fully and splendidly in the heavens. Apuleius(yi. 160) sums the matter up when he describes4 Isis as the chiefest of the heavenly ones, the inclusive manifesta tion ofgods and goddesses... whose unique divinity the whole world adores under manifold forms, with varied rites and by
 multifarious names.
 It is unnecessary here to dwell on particular cults in detail, but an exception must be made of Manichaeism because of its special impact on Christian thought. Its founder was the prophet Mani, who was bom in Babylonia c. 216 and suffered martyr dom under Bahram I c. 277. Often classified as a Christian heresy, it was really a completely independent religion embodying Christian, but also Buddhist and Zoroastrian, elements. Indeed, it claimed to be the only universal religion, giving in its fulness the revelation which prophets prior to Mani had only communicated fragmentarily. The elaborate, dramatic myths in which this revelation came to be clothed hardly concern us here. In essence Manichaeism was a gnosis, akin in some respects to the Gnosticism which will be examined later in this chapter, and as such offered men salvation by knowledge. It was founded on a radical dualism, and taught that reality consists of two great forces eternally opposed to cach other, Good (that is, God, Truth, Light) and Evil, or Darkness, the latter being identified with matter. As he exists, man is tragically involved in the material order; he is fallen and lost. Actually, however, he is a particle of Light, belonging to, though exiled from, the tran scendent world. He is of the same essence as God, and human souls arc fragments of the divine substance. His salvation lies in grasping this truth by an interior illumination which may be spontaneous, but usually comes in response to initiation into the Manichaean fellowship; and in the process of salvation, paradoxically, God is at once redeemer and redeemed. The all-important thing was to withdraw oneself from the con tamination of the flesh, matter being the fundamental evil. Such in outline was the dualist doctrine which, with its highly organized church, its graded hierarchy ofadherents ("auditors', 'elect', 'priests', 'bishops', 'apostles' or 'masters' ), and its cor responding degrees of asceticism, swept over Europe, Africa and Asia from the end of the third century and won such notable converts as Augustine.
 3. Graeco-Rotnan Philosophyl
 Philosophy was the deeper religion of most intelligent people; what is more important for our purpose, its concepts provided thinkers, Christian and non-Christian alike, with an intellectual framework for expressing their ideas. The two most influential types of thought in our period harked back to Platonism and Stoicism. Of the other great classical systems, Aristotelianism exerted a certain influence through its logic, and some ofits principles (for example, that a supreme Mind is the ultimate cause of the universe) were absorbed by later forms ofPlatonism. Scepticism, which traced its ancestry to Pyrrho of Elis (fl1. 300 B.C.), and maintained that knowledge is impossible and that suspense ofjudgment is the only rational attitude, en joyed a revival with Aencsidemus (fl. 60 B.c.) and Sextus Em piricus (fl. a .d. 175) and kept up a formidable attack on dogmatism ofevery kind, but its appeal was to rather limited, chiefly scientific, circles. On the other hand, Epicureanism (founded by Epicurus: 341-270 b.c.), with its denial that the gods are concerned about human affairs, and its doctrine that reality is composed of an infinity of atoms in a void and that sensation is the criterion of good and evil, had lost all effective force.
 The key to Plato's (c. 429-347 b.c.) philosophy is his theory of knowledge. Being convinced that knowledge in the strict sense is possible, but that it cannot be obtained from anything so variable and evanescent as sense-perception, he was led to posit a transcendent, non-scnsible world of Forms or Ideas (ißn) which arc apprehended by the intellect alone. His point was that, while sensation presents us with great numbers of particular objects which are constantly changing, the mind seizes on certain characteristics which groups of them possess in common and which arc stable. For example, it fastens on the characteristic of beauty common to certain objects and of similarity common to others, and so reaches the Forms of beauty-in-itsclf and likcncss-in-itsclf. The Forms thus resemble the universals of which modern philosophers speak, but we should notice that for Plato they had objective existence. It is an open question whether he believed there were Forms corre sponding to every class of sensible things, but we do know that he regarded them as arranged in a hierarchy crowned by the most universal Form of all, the Form of the Good (later he called it the One), which is the cause of all the other Forms and of our knowledge of them. Being unchanging and eternal, the Forms alone are truly real. They transcend, and are wholly independent of, the world of particular sensible things. In fact, the latter, the world ofBecoming, is modelled on the world of Forms, and particulars only are what they are in so far as the Forms participate in, or are copied by, them.
 The transition to Plato's psychology and theology is easy. In his vievw the soul is an immaterial entity, immortal by nature; it exists prior to the body in which it is immured, and is destined to go on existing after the latter's extinction. So far from having anything to do with the world ofBecoming, it properly belongs to the world of Forms (that is, ofBeing), and it is in virtue of the knowledge it had of them in its pre-mundane existence that it can recognize (he calls this aváuvnaý, or recollection) them here. It is, moreover, a tripartite structure, consisting ofa higher or 'rational' element which apprehends truth and by rights should direct the man's whole life, a 'spirited' element which is the scat of the nobler emotions, and an 'appetitive' element which covers the carnal desires. As regards theology, it seems fairly certain that, in spite of the reverential language he often used ofit, Plato did not regard the Form of the Good or the One as God in the ordinary sense of the word. Soul for him was the supreme directive, organizing principle, and he believed in a World-Soul animating the material universe. In the Timaeus he pictures a Demiurge, or Craftsman, shaping the world out of pre-existent material, and the Demiurge symbolizes the World Soul. But we should observe that the Demiurge constructs the world according to the pattern wliich he contemplates in the world of Forms. He and that world seem independent of each other, so that we are left with two ultimate principles in addi tion to pre-existent matter.
 Plato's pupil, Aristotle (384-322 b.c .), modified his master's teaching in several important respects. A feature of his logic was his analysis of the ways in which the mind thinks about things. These he called Categories, and he enumerated ten in all: substance (ovoia--in the sense ofindividual thing), quantity, quality, relation, place, date, position, state, action, passivity. 
Aristotle, however, believed that these represent not only the ways in which the mind thinks about the external world, but also the modes in which things objectively exist in that world. From this it is apparent that, unlike Plato, he was a realist and accepted the reality of the material world as we know it. Further, he sharply criticized Plato's theory of Forms. He fully agreed that there must be Forms in the sense of universals common to all particulars ofa class, and also that they must be objectively real and not mere mental concepts; he was even prepared to describe them as 'secondary substances' (8^UTEpaI ovoiai). But he objected to Plato's suggestion that they are 'separate from', or transcend, particulars. His contention was that they arc actually present in particulars; in fact, die indi vidual substance (ovoia in the primary sense) is a compound (ovvoŽov) of the subject, or substratum (uOKeiuevov, or ÚÀn), and the Form. In harmony with this his psychology differed from Plato's. So far from being disparate entities, he taught that body and soul constitute a composite unity, the body being as matter to the soul and the soul, as it were, the Form of the body. As regards God, he took up Plato's thought that Soul is immnortal and self-moving, the source of motion and change in all that is not soul, and expanded it into the con ception of an eternal Mind which, unmoved itself, is the Prime Mover of all that exists.
 Stoicism presents a very different picture. Founded by Zeno of Citium c. 300 B.C., it was a closely knit system of logic, metaphysics and ethics. Its lofty, ifsomewhat impersonal, moral ideal won it countless adherents; it taught conquest of self, hfe in accordance with nature (i.e. the rational principle within us), and the brotherhood ofman. From the theological point of view, however, what was most remarkable about it was its pantheistic materialism. The Stoics reacted vigorously against the Platonic differentiation of a transcendent, intelligible world not perceptible by the senses from the ordinary world of sensible expericnce. Whatcver exists, they argued, must be body, and the universe as a whole must be through and through material. Yet within realityl they drew a distinction between a passive and an active principle. There is crude, unformed matter, without character or quality; and there is the dynamic reason or plan (Aôyoc) which forms and organizes it. This latter they envisaged as spirit [7veiua) or fiery vapour; it was from this all-pervading fire that the cruder, passive matter emerged, and in the end it would be reabsorbed into it in a universal con flagration. But though more ethereal than the passive matter it informed, spirit was none the less material, and the Stoics were not afraid to accept the paradox of two bodies occupying the same space which their theory entailed. This active principle or Logos permeates reality as mind or consciousness pervades the body, and they described it as God, Providence, Nature, the soul ofthe universe [anima mnundi). Their conception that every thing that happens has been ordered by Providence to man's best advantage was the basis of their ethical doctrine of sub mission to fate.
 Thus Stoicism was a monism teaching that God or Logos is a finer matter immanent in the material universe. But it also taught that particular things arc microcosms of the whole, each containing within its unbroken unity an active and a passive principle. The former, the principle which organizes and forms it, is its logos, and the Stoics spoke of 'seminal logoi' [lóyo1 OTEPu aTIKo Ý), seeds, as it were, through the activity of which individual things come into existence as the world develops. All these 'seminal logoi' are contained within the supreme, universal Logos; they arc so many particles of the divine Fire which permeates reality. This leads to the Stoic doctrine of human nature. The soul in man is a portion of, or an emanation from, the divine Fire which is the Logos. It is a spirit or warm breath pervading the body and giving it form, character, organization. Material itself, it survives the body, but is itself mortal, persisting at longest until the world conflagration. Its parts are, first, the five senses; then the power of speech or self expression; then the reproductive capacity; and, finally, the ruling element Iró nyeuoVIKÓV), which is reason. The soul is the logos in man, and the Stoics made an important distinction between the immanent logos' [hóyo evõiáĐero ), which isliis reason considered merely as present in him, and the 'ex pressed logos' (oyo npopopıkó ), by which they meant his reason as extrapolated or made known by means of the faculty of speech or self-expression.
 Both the Stoicism and, to an even greater extent, the Platonism which flourished in the first two Christian centuries show important deviations from their classical prototypes. Each had borrowed from the other, and indeed the intellectual attitude of great numbers of educated people might be de scribed as either a Platonizing Stoicism or a Stoicizing Platonism. Not that it would be accurate to speak ofEclecticism as holding the field. On the academic plane at any rate the two schools maintained their independence and engaged in polemics with each other. Thus the Stoicism preached by such men as Seneca (c. 4 b.c.-a .d. 65), Epictetus (c. 55-138) and Marcus Aurelius (121-80) was a distinct system of thought, although with the emphasis placed on conduct. There is discernible in it, however, alongside a theoretical allegiance to the traditional materialism, a definite movement away from the classic Stoic position. Seneca, for example, so stresses the divine perfection and good ness that he approximates to the conception of God as tran scendent. Marcus Aurelius, too, divides human nature into three parts-body, animal soul (puxý) and intelligence (vov )-and explicitly states that the last of these, the ruling part (TỎ nyepovixóv) in man, is not derived, as the other two arc, from the four elements which constitute matter (fire, air, water, earth). It is an offshoot (anóonaoua) from God, a spiritual substance of loftier origin than matter.
 The Platonism of the period (Middle Platonism, as it is called) presents a much less coherent aspect. Generalization about it is not easy, for several diverse trends of thought were to be found in it. For example, two of its leading second century representatives were Atticus and Albinus, the one hostile to and the other greatly influenced by Aristotelianism. As a movement, however, this revived Platonism had a strongly religious colouring. The chief objects of its adherents were to understand the truth about the divine world and, so far as their personal lives were concerned, to point the way to attaining the greatest possible likeness to God. From the theological point of view their most notable contribution was to bring together the supreme Mind which Aristotle had postulated and Plato's Good, and to equate them. So Middle Platonism was more definitely theistic than its classical forerunner: at the summit of the hier archy of being it placed the unique Divine Mind. It retained the conception bequeathed by Plato of a transcendent world of Forms, but represented them as God's thoughts. Albinus's system was more complex. He distinguished the First Mind or God, Who is unmoved, the Second Mind or World-Intellect, through which He operates and which is set in motion by desire for Him, and the World-Soul. Celsus, the critic of Christianity whom Origen sought to answer, belonged to the same school. God, he argued, cannot have created the body, or indeed any thing mortal, and only Soul can have come from Him directly;l and the idea of His coming down to men must be rejected as involving a change in Him, and a change necessarily for the worse.2 In general the Middle Platonists were ready enough to allow the existence of intermediary divinities. This was only to be expected in view ofthe position they assigned to the supreme God. While including Him in the hierarchy of being, they nevertheless regarded Him as utterly transcendent, only to be glimpsed in occasional flashes of illumination.
 4. Neo-Platon ism
 In Neo-Platonism the tendency to make God transcendent was carried as far as it could go. This was that fully developed system, Platonic in its main inspiration, but incorporating Aristotelian, Stoic and even Oriental elements, which flourished from the middle of the third century and with which the fathers of the second half of our period were familiar. It is best exemplified by Plotinus (205-70), the Greek-speaking Egyptian who was its founder and also one of the greatest thinkers off the ancient world.
Plotinus was, philosophically speaking, a monist, conceiving of reality as a vast hierarchical structure with grades descending from what is beyond being to what falls below being. His highest principle, or hypostasis', is God, more properly de signated as the One. Itself beyond being, and even beyond mind (with which, it will be recalled, the Middle Platonists equated God), the One is the source from which being derives, the goal to which it ever strives to return. The process is described analogically as emanation, but it leaves the One un diminished and unchanged, just as the radiation of light from the sun docs not cause it to suffer any loss. Ineffably simple, the One cannot be the subject of any attributes; we can call It good, not in the sense that it possesses goodness as a quality, but that It is goodness. Immediately below the One in the hierarchy comes the second hypostasis, Mind or Thought; and below and issuing from it comes the third hypostasis, Soul. Mind com prises the world of Forms, which it contemplates in its effort to return to the One; and thus multiplicity is introduced into the universe. It is the causal principle, being identified with Plato's Demiurge. Soul is divided into two: the higher soul, which is akin to Mind and transcends the material order, and the lower soul, or Nature (pioiz), which is the soul of the phenomenal world. AIl individual souls arc emanations from the World Soul, and like it they have a higher clement which is related to Mind, and a lower element which is directly connected with the body. Matter in itself, that is, unilluminated by form, is darkness or non-being, and as such is evil.
 Two features of Nco-Platonism deserve to be stressed. As expounded by Plotinus, it represents an optimistic attitude to the universe. Material though it is, the world as we know it is good in his eyes; it is created and ordered by the higher soul, and is held together by Nature. Though matter in itself is evil, the visible universe reflects the intelligible order, and as such should be accepted as the best ofall possible worlds. Secondly, the religious bias of the whole Nco-Platonic conception is patent. Whatever exists is an 'overflow' of the One, and per vading all reality, at its different levels, is the ardent longing for union with what is higher, and ultimately with the One itself. So the human soul, fired by the heavenly Eros of which Plato spoke in his Symposium, is challenged to undertake this ascent. The first stage is one ofpurification; it must free itself from the body and the beguilements of sense-perception. At the second stage it rises to the level of Mind and busies itself with philosophy and science, retaining, however, its self-consciousness. The fmal stage consists in mystical union with the One: it is mediated by ecstasy, and when this occurs the awareness of the distinction between subject and object is lost. In this present life, ofcourse, the otate of ecstasy is rarely, if ever, attained and is bound to be short-lived; Plotinus, we are informed by his biographer Porphyry,l was himselfgranted this experience four times only in five years.
 5. Judaism
 Judaism was the cradle in which Christianity was nurtured, the source to which it was uniquely indebted. It left a deep imprint, as is generally agreed, on the Church's liturgy and ministry, and an even deeper one on its teaching. In evaluating this impact, we must take account both of Palestinian Judaism
 and ofthe Hellenized version current at Alexandria. The former can be dealt with quite briefly, for the heyday of its influence falls outside this book in the apostolic age, when it moulded the thought of all the New Testament writers. Yet, in spite of the early rupture between Christians and Jews, it would be a grave error to dismiss it as a negligible force in our period. Until the middle of the second century, when Hellenistic ideas began to come to the fore, Christian theology was taking shape in predominantly Judaistic moulds, and the categories of thought used by almost all Christian writers before the Apologists were largely Jewish. This explains why the teaching of the Apostolic Father, for example, while not strictly unorthodox, often strikes a strange note when judged by later standards. And it is certain that this Judaco-Christian' theology continued to exercise a powerful influence well beyond the second century.
The two features of later Palestinian Judaism which call for mention here are its attitude to divine 'hypostases' and its heightened interest in angels. It is certain that the former, and by no means unlikely that the latter, helped to create an atmo sphere ofthought propitious to the development ofthe Christian conception of God as three-personal. Students of the Old Testament arc familiar with the growing tendency therel visible to personify Wisdom and to assign it creative functions; and the readiness of New Testament writers like St. Paul to avail them selves of the idea in order to explain the status of Christ is also a commonplace. In later Judaism we comne across a multitude of such figuresWisdom itself (one text2 implies that it was Wisdom to whom God said, 'Let us make man in our image', etc.), God's 'glory' or Presence' (Shekinah), His Word, His Spirit (sometimes] spoken of as God's agent in creation), and others too. It remains a matter of dispute how far they were actually hypostatized; the probability is that they were personi fied abstractions, or else periphrases for God Himself, and that the question of their independent subsistence was never raised. At the same time there was an enormous extension and sharpen ing in later Judaism of the belief in angels, the ministers of God, so frequently, and until Daniel anonymously, mentioned in the Old Testament. Several of them were now given personal names, and we read4 of seven (or six) archangels. God's will in His world was executed, so popular piety liked to imagine, by them as His deputies, and there was even an angel, Uriel, ap pointed to regulate the movement of the stars.5 Of particular interest, some scholars have thought, is the suggestion, ofwhich traces can be found in several sources,6 that in the heavenly court two angelic powers, sometimes identified as Michael and Gabriel, stand before God's throne interceding for men.
 Rather closer attention must be given to the special brand of Judaism which flourished at Alexandria. In earlier days it had produced the Scptuagint version of the Old Testament, and in the Christian period it proved a highly sympathetic channel for introducing Hellenistic culture to the early Church. Greek ideas had always attracted the Jews of that great cosmopolitan city, set at the frontiers between East and West, and it was here that the most thoroughgoing attempt was made to inter pret Jewish theology in terms of Hellenistic philosophy. Per haps the most notable exponent of these tendencies was Philo (c. 30 B.C.-c. a .d.45), who, as well as being a scholarly man with a decidedly mystical bent, was a considerable personage in the Jewish community at Alexandria and headed the delegation which it sent to the Emperor Gaius in a .d. 40. An inflexible Jew in faith and practice, he was drawn to the Greek philosophers, especially Plato, accepting who leheartedly the Platonic distinc tion between the ideal, or intelligible, and the material worlds, but maintained that all their best ideas had been anticipated in the Jewish Scriptures. The Pentateuch was his favourite study, and the majority of his voluminous works are devoted to ex pounding it. He regarded the Bible as fully inspired in the sense that God used its authors as passive instruments for com municating His will.I Two aspects of his thought arc ofespecial interest to students of Christian doctrine.
 First, the method of allegorizing Scripture by means of which he was able to show that the truths set forth by revealed religion were identical with those of the philosophers. Alle gorical exegesis was no novelty at that time; scholars had em ployed it for centuries to discover hidden meanings in the poems of Homer and Hesiod, and with its help the Stoics (for example, L. A. Comutus: fl. a .d. 50) enabled themselves to read their own metaphysical system out of the ancient myths. More than a hundred years before an Alexandrian Jew, Aristo bulus, had used it to explain away the cruder anthropo morphisms of the Pentateuch. Philo takes it up enthusiastically, and contends2 that, of the various attitudes possible to the Mosaic Law, much the most satisfactory is to observe its prescriptions punctiliously while at the same time striving with the aid of allegory to grasp their deeper purport. He comparesl the literal sense of Scripture to the shadow which the body casts, finding its authentic, profoundcr truth in the spiritual meaning which it symbolizes. Not that he wants to depreciate, much less abolish, the literal meaning: just as man is body and soul and must pay attention to the former as the tabernacle of the latter, so the plain historical sense merits the fullest respect.2 By these principles he is able to explain] the story of Adam and Eve as a myth symbolizing the creation of the human earthy soul along with the intelligence, senses and passions, the seduc tion of the intelligence by pleasure and its subjection to the material order, and the ways in which it can return to its original state. This is merely one example ofa method by which, while adhering strictly to the letter of the Law, he can regard it as a divinely authorized veil covering a whole complex ofGreek philosophical ideas which he found intellectually congenial.
 Secondly, there is his concept of the Logos, or VWord. Guided by the Middle Platonists he so much admired, Philo taught that God is utterly transcendent; He transcends even virtue, knowledge and absolute goodness and beauty, the eternal Forms which his revered master, Plato, had postulated. God is pure being (rỏ óvro ov), absolutely simple and self sufficing.5 and can be described6 as 'without quality' (ano1o ) -which probably means that, by His transcendence, He cannot be included in any of the logical categories in which we classify finite beings. The question thus arose of His relation to the world. It was all the more urgent because Jewish theology pictured God as calling it into existence by His fiat and being directly concerned with it, while Platonism too insisted on the divine formation and governance of the universe. The con temporary Platonic solution, as we have seen, was to interpose a hierarchy of divine beings between the Supreme Good, or God, and the material order, and to regard these as ruling, or even creating, the latter. This could not commend itself to Philo, since nothing must interfere with the uniqueness of the God revealed in Scripture. Instead he conceived! of inter mediary powers (Öuvauß1?) which, though their status is some what confused, were not so much distinct beings as God's operations considered in abstraction from Himself. Among these intermediaries the supreme and most important was the Logos, the eldest and most akin to God', as he calls it,2 of the things that have come into existence'
 Philo's teaching about the Logos is ambiguous, even incon sistent, but its main lineaments are clear enough. As inter mediary between God and the universe the Logos has a double role: it is God's agent in creation,3 and it is also the means by which the mind apprehends God.4 Both ideas hark back to Stoicism. We have noticeds that for the Stoics Logos (which also means reason or plan) was the rational principle immanent in reality, giving form and mneaning to it; at the same time reality was comprehensible to men because of the presence of Logos in them. Philo has taken up the conception and linked it with his doctrine of divine transcendence. No doubt he was helped by the fact that in the Bible he read that God created the world by His word (2óyo), and that it was by His word that He revealed Himself to the prophets; and he was also acquainted with the Wisdom theology, according to which God first created Wisdom and then used her to create the world. There has been much discussion whether he regarded the Lagos as a personal being, but to ask tliis is to misconceive his position. What is important, from the point of view of his mctaphysic, is that he identifies6 the Logos with the Platonic world of Forms or archetypes, of which sensible reality is a copy. Like the Middle Platonists, he docs not regard that world as self-existent, but simply as expressing the mind of the one God. Just as in man (here we again observe Stoic influences at work) there is a dóyo evðıábero (i.e. the rational thought in the mind) and also a Adyoç TpopopiKó (i.e. the thought uttered as a word), so the divine Logos is first of all the ideas 
or thoughts of God's mind, and is then projected into formless, unreal matter, making it into a real and rational universe.l When Philo speaks2 of it in personal terms as first-begotten Son', the personification is not to be taken too seriously.
 The Logos is, of course, the medium of God's government of the world. Being immanent in it as well as transcendent in the divine mind, it is 'the captain and steersman of the uni verse'.3 And since it is the Platonic world of Forms, we can see how in contemplating the Logos men can come to the know ledge of God.4 Further, when the Old Testament describes the appearance of the angel of Yahweh to the patriarchs, Philo's explanations is that in fact it was the Logos.
 6. The Gnostic Way
 One of the most potent forces operating in the Church's en vironment, particularly in the second and third centuries, was Gnosticism. Tins is the name (from yvóoi = knowledge) ap plied to an amorphous group of sects or schools of thought about which theologians like Irenaeus, Tertullian and Hip polytus inform us. They treat it simply as a Christian heresy, an aberration brought about by the adulteration of sound apostolic doctrine with pagan philosophy,.6 or even astrology and Greek mystery religions,7 and charge8 the Simon Magus mentioned in Acts 8 with having originated it. Many modern scholars have accepted the main part of this thesis, so that A. Harnack could describe9 Gnosticism as the extreme Hellenization of Chris tianity'. It is true that the Gnostic systems with which we arc best acquainted were patently Christian in intention. On the other hand, there were others (c.g. those represented by the Naassene' tractate and the Book of Baruch' cited by Hip polytusl0) in which the Christian features were quite superficial.
Further, there seems to have been a Jewish Gnosticism ante dating the Christian; and in the apostolic age we meet with warnings, e.g. in I John and the Pastoral Epistles, against sinister influences which appear to be Gnostic. It is therefore more satisfactory to regard Gnosticism as a movement or, more precisely, tendency which was wider and, probably, older than Christianity. The product of syncretism, it drew upon Jewish, pagan and Oriental sources of inspiration, and brought a distinctive attitude and certain characteristic ideas to the solution of the problem of evil and human destiny.
 We can perhaps illustrate what Gnosticism was by giving a rough, composite summaryl of the teaching current in one of its most important schools, that of the Christian Valentinus, who taught at Alexandria and later at Rome in the middle decades of the second century. According to this, above and beyond the universe dwells the supreme Father, Bythos, the unbegotten Monad and perfect Aeon, and by His side Sige (Silence), who is His Ennoia (Thought). From these proceed, by successive emanations, three pairs ofaeons, Nous (or Mono genes) and Alethcia (Truth), Logos and Zoe (Life), Anthropos (Man) and Ecclesia (Church), thus completing the Ogdoad. From Logos and Zoe proceed five (the Dccad), and from Anthropos and Ecclesia six (the Dodecad), further pairs of aeons. These thirty form the Pleroma, or fulness of the God head, but the only-begotten Nous alone possesses the pos sibility of knowing and revealing the Father. The lowest of the thirty aeons, however, Sophia, yielded to an ungovernable desire to apprehend His nature. She travailed with the guilty yearning she had conceived (Enthymesis), and would have been dissolved into the All had not Horos (Limit: also called Stauros, or Cross), appointed as guardian of the Pleroma, con vinced her that the Father is incomprehensible. So Sophia cast away her passion and was allowed to remain within the Pleroma. Nous and Alctheia meanwhile, at the Father's behest, produce a new pair of aeons, Christ and the Holy Spirit, to instruct the aeons in their true relation to Him. Order having been thus restored, they sing the praises of the Father and pro duce the Saviour Jesus as the perfect fruit of the Pleroma.
 But what of Sophia's monstrous birth, Enthymesis, exiled from die Pleroma and now known as a lower Sophia, or Acha moth? As she wanders about the still lifeless void, her anguish brings matter to birth, while out ofher yearning for Christ she produces the 'psychic' (puzıköv) or soul-element. Then Christ has pity on her and, descending by the Cross (Horos), im presses form on her formlessness. As a result of this she gives birth to spiritual, or 'pneumatic', substance. Out of these three elements-matter, psyche and pneuma-the world then came into being. First, Sophia formed a Creator, or Demiurge, out of psychic substance as an image of the supreme Father. The Demiurge, who is in fact the God of the Old Testament, then created heaven and earth and the creatures inhabiting it. When he made man, he first made the earthy man', and then breathed his own psychic substance into him; but without his know ledge Achamoth planted pneuma, or spirit, born from herself, in the souls of certain men. This spiritual clement yearns for God, and salvation consists in its liberation from the lower elements with which it is united. This is the task which die Saviour Jesus accomplishes. According to their constitution, there arc three classes of men-the carnal or material, the psychic and the pneumatic. Those who are carnal cannot in any case be saved, while in order to attain redemption the pneu matic only need to apprehend the teaching oflesus. The psychic class can be saved, though with difficulty, through the know ledge and imitation ofJesus.
 This bizarre mixture of speculation, fantasy and mysticism, interspersed with Scriptural reminiscences, was typical of Gnosticism. It was neither religion in the strict sense nor philosophy pure and simple; it is best described as a species of theosophy. There were many systems or schools, and they differed markedly from each other. The Valcntinian school, for example, in addition to Valentinus himself, included such notable figures as Heraclcon {fl. 175), the author ofan allegoriz ing commentary on the Fourth Gospel, and Ptolemaeus (f c. 180), whose Letter to Floral is an invaluable witness to Gnostic principles of exegesis. The most important Christian Gnostic apart from Valentinus was the Syrian-born Basilidcs, who lectured at Alexandria c. 120-40. In his system2 we meet with the same conception of graded orders of existence (in this case three hundred and sixty-five heavens formed each of a group of angels) descending from the supreme, ineffable Father, and the same opposition between Him and the God of the Jews, the creator of the material universe and man. Re demption consists in the coming of the Father's first-begotten, Nous, in human form to release the spiritual element im prisoned in men's bodies. While Christian motifs predominate here, they play a minor part in the Gnostic Justin's Book of Baruch',3 which expounds a closely related story of redemp tion in the setting of Greek myths and the Mosaic account of creation. Again, the 'Naassene' sermon already referred4 to takes a short hymn addressed to the god Attis as its text. On the basis of this it seeks to explain the origin of man and of the suffering to which he is heir. Other Gnostics of whom we hear in the second century are Menander of Samaria, who is said to have practised magic arts;5 Satornilus (or Saturninus) of Antioch, who emphasized the asceticism which was one pos sible corollary of the Gnostic contempt for matter;6 Isidore, the son and disciple of Basilidcs, whose followers deduced that the spiritually perfect were free to be immoral;1 and Carpocrates, who carried this antinomianism to extreme lengths.8 Of Marcion, who stood much closer to the Church, an account will be given later.9
 To speak of Gnosticism as a movement is misleading, for that term suggests a concrete organization or church. There were, as we have seen, plenty of Gnostic teachers, each with his coterie of adherents, but there was no single Gnostic Church. On the other hand, it is clear that behind all the variegated Gnostic sects there lay a common stock of ideas which could fasten upon, adapt themselves to and eventually transform any religious movement concerned to find an answer to the problems of existence, evil and salvation. These ideas may now be briefly summarized. First, all the Gnostic schools were thoroughly dualistic, setting an infinite chasm between the spiritual world and the world of matter, which they regarded as intrinsically evil. Secondly, when they tried to explain how the material order came into existence, they agreed in refusing to attribute its origin to the ultimate God, the God oflight and goodness. It must be the result ofsome primeval disorder, some conflict or fall, in the higher realm, and its fabricator must have been some inferior deity or Demiurge. Where the Old Testa ment was accepted as authoritative, it was easy and natural to identify him with the Creator-God of the Jews. Thirdly, the Gnostics all believed that there is a spiritual element in man, or at any rate in the élite of mankind, which is a stranger in this world and which yearns to be freed from matter and to ascend to its true home. Fourthly, they pictured a mediator or mediators descending down the successive aeons or heavens to help it to achieve this. These ideas were expounded in a setting of elaborate pseudo-cosmological speculation, and extensive use was made of pagan myths, the Old Testament and concepts borrowed from Far Eastern religions.
 In this way, then, the Gnostics sought to explain the riddle of man's plight in a universe he feels to be alien to himself. But what of the redemption they offered? Here we come to the distinctive feature which gives Gnosticism its name. In all the Gnostic systems redemption is brought about by knowledge, and it is the function of the divine mediators to open the eyes of 'pneumatic' men to the truth. The spiritual man', the disciples of the Valentinian Marcus declared.I is redeemed by know ledge'; while according to Basilides,2 *the Gospel is knowledge incompatibility between Christianity and Gnosticism really lay, as second-century fathers like Irenaeus quickly perceived, in their different attitudes to the material order and the historical process. Because of their hostility to matter and their disregard for history, the Gnostics (in the narrower, more convenient sense of the term) were prevented from giving full value to the fundamental Christian doctrine ofthe incarnation of the Word.
