Although the importance of anthropomorphic conceptions in rabbinic
thought is widely recognized, their original nature and significance are
still in need of clarification.! A major difficulty in this task stems from
the scarcity and the obScurity of some of the most important texts,
which, moreover, cannot be dated with any precision.

The purpose of this article is to call attention to some early Chris
tian and Gnostic texts which bear upon Jewish conceptions of the
Divine Body or of the Hypostasis, or both, and might shed new light on
the origin and evolution of these conceptions. I wish to enmphasize that
in the present state of research, only tentative conclusions can be
reached, and that there will be no attempt here to deal with all sides of

the problem.

A tendency to attribute to God not only human feelings, but also a
body of gigantic or cosmic dimensions is not, of course, a specifically
Jewish phenomenon in Antiquity. Indeed, such representations, which
had been current in Greek thought for a very long time, find their
probable origin in pre-Platonic Orphic conceptions. Inside the Greek
world, representations of the cosnmos as a macranthropos, with a head
(the heaven), a belly or a body (the sea or the ether), feet (the earth),
and eyes (the sun and the moon) are found, with some variations, in
the Greek Magical Papyri, the Oracle of Sarapis in Macrobius, the

Hermetic Corpus, and already in an Orphic fragment, where the cosmos is the body of Zeus.2
 In Christian as well as in pagan thought, however, the pervasive influence of Platonism-with its insistence on the total immateriality of God-permitted the development of a theology free from anthropo morphic representations.³ Indeed, the Christian Fathers soon adopted the Academy's devastating critique of traditional religion and of anthro pomorphism in particular.4 Thus the path was opened to Christian theology for a non-anthropomorphic exegesis of Gen 1:26 and for a purely immaterial conception of God.5 In Christianity, therefore, anthropomorphic conceptions of God soon became peripheral, and, as it would seem, of no major importance.6
 The encounter between Jewish thought and Platonic philosophy, on the other hand, was severed soon after Philo, and Jewish exegesis was left to struggle with biblical anthropomorphisms without the help of the most effective of tools: the Platonic conception of a purely imma terial being.7 One of the consequences of this state of affairs was thedevelopment or the increased importance, inside Judaism, of macro cosmic representations of the Divinity.
 It must first be noted that Jewish anthropomorphism seems to have been notorious in the first centuries C..: Patristic literature retains traces of Christian rejection of such conceptions. In this regard, the best-known testimony is probably that of Justin Martyr, who refers, in his Dialogue with Trypho, to the belief of the Jewish teachers who imag ine that the Father of all, the unengendered God, has hands, feet, fingers and a soul, just as a composite being.'"8
 A rejoinder to this text is provided by Origen, who notes, in his Homilies on Genesis, that the Jews--as well as some Christians conceive God in human terms, when they imagine him to possess members and faculties just like a man. Origen adds that they claim to establish this fancy on biblical verses, such as Isa 66:1: The Heaven is my throne, and the earth is my footstool. '*9 According to such a con ception, God's body would be of cosmic dimensions: seated in heaven, he would touch the earth with his feet. The value of this testimony has been unduly belittled in recent research.10 Origen's knowledge of Juda ism was based not only upon Jewish Alexandrian traditions transmitted through Christian writings, but also on third-century Palestinian rab binic thought. There is little doubt that Origen's remark reflects a rab binic conception known to him.
 That this Jewish macrocosmic anthropomorphism was well known to, and attacked by, Christian theologians is emphasized by the testimony-hitherto ignored-of two fourth-century Patristic writers, who are usually far away from Jewish matters. The value of these two texts is strengthened by the very fact that they seem to reflect stock arguments of the adversus Judaeos literature: it shows how widespread these arguments, and the termini used, were.
 In the first of his Homilies on the Origin of Man, Basil the Great inquires about the real meaning of the image and the similitude of God'" (Gen 1:26), and rejects the "vulgar perception" and the "stupid conceptions" of God, according to which he would have the same form as us: a body.
 Empty from your heart all misplaced imagination, throw away from yourself a conception which is unfitting of God's greatness. God has no form he is simple. Do not imagine a form (uopdi) for Him, do not belittle Him, who is great, in Jewish fashion (iovôaixüs); do not enclose God in corporeal concepts, do not delimit·Him according tò the meas ure of your mind.
 Since God is in no way comparable to us, it is not our body which represents his image: the corruptible, concludes Basilius in true Pla tonic fashion, is not the image (eixóv) of the incorruptible. !
 Arnobius of Sicca also accuses the Jews of anthropomorphism. In order to refute a pagan argument against Christian conceptions, he writes:
 And let no one, here, oppose to us the Jewish fables and those of the sect of the Sadduccees, as if we too give forms (formas) to God-for this s said to be taught in their books, and to be affirmed therein as certain, in a peremptory way.12
 I have dealt elsewhere with Arnobius' mention of Sadduccean anthropomorphism.13 In the present context, what is significant, in both his and Basil's testimony, is the use of the word form, or forms, of God as a terminus technicus, 14 This expression recalls the Hellenistic notion of uopoh eoû, which is well known and has been studied at length.15 
My intent here is to focus on one of its aspects which may give a clue to the origin and nature of this Jewish anthrapomorphism. In order to do so, I shall first review some Hermetic and Gnostic texts that seem to contain traces of early Jewish conceptions.
 The Poimandres, the first text of the Corpus Hermeticum, "that grab-bag of Graeco-Roman spirituality, "16 stands at the confluence of various traditions. On the one hand, it represents the mythical expres sion of pessimistic conceptions close to Gnosticism and originally related to popular Platonism. On the other, its Jewish afinities have long been noted. Its cosmogony, in particular, shows close contacts with the Genesis account, and points to Jewish Hellenistic connec tions. 17 Moreover, the Poimandres has recently been shown to display some remarkable parallels with the Slavonic Enoch, 18 a work in which Scholem has found the exact translation of the notion of shi'ur goma, the expression used in Hebrew texts of the rabbinic period to refer to God's body.19
 Now in the anthropogonic myth of the Poimandres, one reads that:
 The Noûs, Father of all beings, being himself life and light, gave birth to an Anthropos similar to Himself, whom He loved as his own child. For the Anthropos was very handsome, since he possessed the image of his Father
 (rp ToÛ Tarpos s eixóva čXuv): indeed, it is his own form (rñs iôias uopdīs) that God loved 20
This Anthropos, then, piercing the envelope of the heavenly spheres, is reflected below in the water, and thus reveals himself to Physis: "he shows to the Physis from below the beautiful form of God'" (r KadYU ToÔ Beoû uopoh)21 This uopoň Beoû, with which Nature immediately falls in love, is then explicitly identified with the beautiful form of the Anthropos" (rs kaàliors uopoħs Toù 'Avepórov).,22 In other words, the Poimandres' myth makes it clear that there is a basic difference, an essential duality, between two divine entities: Nous, the supreme God, who remains invisible and formless, and his hypostatic Form, who is his Son, the Primordial Man.
 According to the language of the Poimandres, moreover., elkov seems to be equivalent to popoh: the form of God is also his image. We shall find elsewhere this identification between the two words in Hellenistic usage.23 In any case, the same ontological differentiation between God and his hypostatic image, or form, also occurs, with some variations, in other Hermetic treatises. These contexts emphasize the theological problem which this conception seeks to solve. In one of the texts, for instance, the world, which is God, is called the "pleroma of life,"" the image of the All," and of the Greatest God.24
 More precisely, a fragment of the Pseudo-Anthimus points out the difference between the Supreme God and his image: "The Son of God, although he possesses all qualities similar to his Father, is nevertheless defective on two points, in that he has a body and in that he is visible.""25
 The basic problem behind these various formulations is best expressed in the subtitle of Corp. Herm. 5: "that God is both non apparent and most apparent." Although God is invisible, according to Platonic theology, a way to see him must nevertheless be found-and this way is the very essence of Hermetic initiation.
 Indeed, the possibility of the supreme God to reveal himself, which leads to this duality of the invisible God and his form or image, seems to have been a major preoccupation in various Gnostic trends, and the same basic structure also appears Gnostic mythology. Such a hierarchical duality is of course very different from what is usually con sidered to be the typical Gnostic dualism, which implies not only a hierarchy of, but also and mainly an opposition between, the two Gods. This opposition is supposed to answer another major problem of Gnos tic thought: its intense desire to solve the problem of evil, that is, to discover its source. It is reasonable to assume, however, that a genetic study of Gnostic dualism should point out some relationship between these two different kinds of break in the Godhead.
 As in the Poimandres, so also in some of the other texts the image of God is said to appear in the water. Thus, in the Apocryphon of John, the Son of Man reveals upon the water the appearance in human (åvôpéoş) form (ứmoŞ) "of Anthropos, the invisible Father of the AI. "26 In the Hypostasis of the Archons, the image of Incorruptibility revealed upon the water is explicitly called the image of God.27 In the Origin of the World, it is Pistis who reveals the likeness of her greatness (m'ntnoč) upon the water,28
 The same duality appears in Eugnostos, where God, who has no human form, is revealed in his form, a great power, or a light, who is an immortal and androgynous man.,29 This perfect and true man is called Adamas in Irenaeus' account of Barbeloite doctrines 30 In another Nag Hammadi text, Zostrianos, the revelation of the hidden God plays a central role. Ephesech, the child of the child," is the messenger who reveals his invisible Father. For he is called both the Son of God and the Perfect Man, 31
The major point of interest in the Gnostic texts referred to above is that the mythical structure they reflect is clearly untouched by Chris tian influence. It is worth noticing that, under a veneer of Christian language, basically the same non-Christian structure is also carried by the Valentinian traditions. In those texts, too, the image of the invisi ble God is his Son. The Tripartite Tractate speaks about the Son of the unknown God,"" about whom one did not speak previously, and who could not be seen."32 This image, adds the same text, is corporeal: The Savior was a corporeal image of the Holy One. He is the Totality in corporeal form."33 Similarly, in the Extracts of Theodotos, the Son is called uopoh râv aióvov, and Christ, eLkòv ToÛ TÀTpóuaros:4 the corporeal image of God is, here again, his form.
 The most clearly anthropomorphic, or rather, macrocosmic concep tions of the deity in late antique Judaism are expressed in the book Shi'ur Qomah ("Measurement of the (divine] stature"), which is extant only in fragmentary form.35 This work, which has been called the most obnoxious text of Jewish mysticism, "36 claims, on the basis of an exegesis of Song of Songs 5:11-16, to give the measurements of the limbs of the divine figure, who is identified with the Beloved.37 Such extreme representations were to have a tremendous echo in Jewish thought: the medieval polemics between Rabbinites and Qaraites, as well as Maimonides' preoccupation with the subject testify to their per sistence 38
 The almost complete lack of internal criteria for the dating of this text has strongly impeded the proper understanding of its abstruse con ceptions. In opposition to those scholars for whom the Shi'ur Qomah book stemmed from the Gaonic period, the late Gershom Scholem, who devoted much attention to this text over an extended period of time, reached the conclusion that it was probably redacted in either the Tannaitic or the early Amoraic period. '"39
 More precisely, J. Dan tends to accept the alleged authorship of the document (Rabbi Aqiva and Rabbi Ishmael) as an indication of the milieux in which the mystical exegesis of Song of Songs was first developed.40 This assessment stands to reason. No claims will be made here, however, about the dating of the Shi'ur Oomah book itself. Our present interest is not in the textual problem, but in the origins of the mythologoumenon. In that respect, it would seem that some of those elements integrated and developed by Palestinian Rabbis of the early second century were already present in first-century Judaism, at least in nuce. In other words, there is strong reason to presume that the origi nal Jewish speculation on the macrocosmic divine body is pre-Christian. One should point out that even the most basic question, the iden tity of the divine figure whose dimensions are given in the Shi'ur Qomah, seems to remain unanswered. In this regard, some remarks of Scholem deserve more attention than they have received until now. He
 writes:
 We may ask whether there did not exist ...a belief in a fundamental distinc tion between the appearance of God the Creator, the Demiurge, i.e. one of His aspects, and His indefinable essence? There is no denying the fact that it is precisely the "primordial man" on the throne of the Merkabah whom the Shiur Komah calls Yotser Bereshith.41
 and adds, a little further:
 The Shiur Komah referred not to the "dimensions'" of the divinity but to those of its corporeal appearance. This is clearly the interpretation of the original texts.42
 Scholem's conclusion was founded upon the analysis of the Hebrew traditions, and in particular upon the description of Yahoel, the angel with the twice-theophoric name who appears first in the Apo calypse of Abrahan (chap. 10), then to become Mețațron Merkavah and Talmudic literature.43 There is no doubt that Yahoel-Mețatron, whose name is said to be identical to his Master's name, 44 is conceived as God's archangelic hypostasis. It comes as no surprise, therefore., when the Shiur Qomah attributes cosmic dimensions to Mețațron's body.45 The scarcity of Hebrew sources, however, and their relatively late dating require an appeal to outside testimonies and parallel tradi tions in order to unveil more precisely the original place and function of such conceptions and their evolution.
 An unambiguous testimony exists about the probable existence of a strikingly similar conception of a divine archangelic hypostasis in first-century Judaism. We know from the reports about the sect of the Maghariya and their doctrines (one of Qirqisānî in the name of el Muqāmmis and another by Shahrastāni) that in opposition to Sadduc cean anthropomorphism, Maghāriya theology, four hundred years before Arius," referred all anthropomorphic biblical verses to an angel, whom it considered to be the creator of the world.46 This angel, more over, was said to bear God's name, while his appearance among men was presented as God's own appearance.47
 A text from the fringes of early Christianity provides us with another parallel to the Shi'ur Qomah material. The Jewish-Christian book of Elchasai, which can be dated to the end of the first century,4
 48
gave the huge dimensions of a couple of angels, male and female, the Son of God and the Holy Spirit. This Elchasaite representation, which reflects Jewish esoteric traditions, turns that angelic hypostasis of God, which is elsewhere described as single and androgynous, into two.49 Yet this duplication does not change the basic structure of the original con ception, which attributed a human form and gigantic dimensions to an angelic being, while God himself remained unseen and formless.
 The various traditions about God's hypostatic form seem to con verge upon the Judaism of the first Christian century. The cumulative evidence leads to the tentative conclusion that there existed then a cluster of mythologoumena about the archangelic hypostasis of God, also identified with the First Adam (and therefore the true image of God), whose body possessed cosmic dimensions. This figure, more over, who bore God's name, had created the world at his command.
 Perhaps traces of these mythologoumena may also be discerned beneath some traits of Philo's theology, in particular his complex con ception of the Logos as God's intermediary in the creation of man. 50 Although the Philonic Logos is the invisible, intelligible, and incorpo real image of God, some of the metaphorical descriptions of him might point to origins in mythological traditions: he is called God's name, his image, the Beginning, and also "Man after the Image."" Ruler of the Angels, he is also identified with Wisdom and Israel; like Israel, he is called 'he who sees God,'" and, like Wisdom, vision of God."51
 Finally, it should be noted that the idea of a divine intermediary, playing an active role in creation, is even present in rabbinic literature. As S. Liebermann has pointed out, the notion that heaven and earth were created by the likeness on high"-the same notion developed at length in Gnostic sources-is also found in an important rabbinic text, 52
The most striking parallel to the Shi'ur Qomah fragments., however, is probably the conception of the divine hypostasis developed by the Valentinian Markos. This parallel has been noted long ago by Moses Gaster, who called attention, in particular, to the Marcosian conception of the Body of Truth,"$3 According to Markos, "the first Father, unbegotten, unthinkable, and unsubstantial (ảvoúouo), neither male nor female, wanted to bring forth what is ineffable to Him and give form to the invisible (Kai rò đóparov popowbħa); He opened His mouth, and sent forth a Word (logos) similar to Himself, who, stand ing, showed Him who He was, revealing Himself as the form of the invisible (aiT; Tou dopároV Lopon davels),"s4
 It is this Logos that will then become the Body of Truth (guúa Tns àhnbeiaş), a divine figure also called Anthropos whose twelve members are composed of the twenty-four letters of the alphabet, grouped in symmetrical couples of opposite letters.55 The text leaves no doubt that the body composed of these letters, or elements (arouyeLa), is macrocosmic since each letter is spelled by other letters, in an unlim ited process.56 Now the letters which build the body of Truth are also called its forms, more precisely those which the Lord has called angels, and which continually behold the face of the Father."$7 For Markos, then, God does not have in the Body of Truth only one form, but many. In other contexts, too, form is closely connected to angel: in the Extracts of Theodotos, it is said that 'spiritual and intelligible beings, as well as archangels, have each one his own form and his own body."58 Similarly, the Nag Hammadi tractate On the Origin of the World mentions the seventy-two forms (uopoń) of the divine Chariot (the Merkavah of Ezechiel and of early Jewish Mysticism), the Cherub," and the seven archangels.S9
Its polymorphy is a major aspect of the Metatron figure in the Shiur Qomah fragments and in Merkavah texts. I have analyzed else where this two-fold polymorphy, pointing out its striking similarity the polymorphy of Christ in both Gnostic and early Christian texts.60 Like Christ, Me Da Dron appears both as a child and an old man (na 'ar-zaqen = puer-senex) and both as in the form of God and in the form of a servant (compare Phil 2:6-11). I cannot rehearse my argu ment here, but would like to call attention to a puzzling detail, hitherto unnoticed, which proves to my mind a genetic relationship between the two traditions.
 In the longest preserved passage of the Shi'ur Qomah, Mețatron said possess two names, the first in twenty-four letters, the other in only six (mttrwn).61 Markos Gnostikos, similarly, conceived Christ as bearing two names: one exoteric, in twenty-four letters, and the other esoteric, in six letters (unrouş) !62 is more reasonable to assume that the Gnostic conception here retains traces of a Jewish tradition, rather than to postulate an influence from Valentinian circles upon the Hebrew milieu in which the Shi'ur Qomah conceptions were first developed.
 There is no reason, however, to assume a direct link between Mar kos and esoteric (?) Jewish circles. Further references to the cosmic divine hypostasis might help us in tracing the proximate channels through which such Jewish conceptions could have reached Markos. In particular, would it be possible to go back from the second to the first century, and find in the New Testament itself traces of this very con ception?
 Scholem once made a random suggestion that the notion of the guf ha-kavod, or guf ha-shekhina, which appears in the Shi'ur Qomah, might be related to the Pauline or deutero-Pauline notion of Christ's "body of glory'" (aüụa rns Sóğns [Phil 3:21]),63 Oddly enough, however, the possibility has not been investigated that Paul (and the writers of the deutero-Pauline letters) knew of such conceptions of the cosmic body of the divine hypostasis, which he would have radically transformed and spiritualized when he developed his new and very personal concep tion of the mystical "Body of Christ" (aôya XpLơroû) as the Church (see, for instance, 1 Cor 12:12-26 or Rom 12:4),64 Modern research has devoted much attention to this conception, which plays a central role in Paul's theology. Yet arguments have been adduced either for a postulated pre-Christian Gnostic Urmensch (Paul's conception being then a reaction against this Urmensch) 65 or for the possible Jewish origin of Paul's categories of thought."6ó It would seem that New Testament scholars have not hitherto seriously con sidered the possibility of a Jewish pre-Christian macranthropos. 67
 Since, however, Paul's conception of the růụa Xpơroû is so radi cally new and spiritualized, any argument in favor of such a link must remain speculative. Rather, I would like to suggest other possible traces of the Jewish mythologoumenon in the New Testament, particu larly to the two christological hymns incorporated into the Pauline corpus: Phil 2:6-11 and Col 1:15-20. Both hymns stem from the very first stratum of Palestinian Christianity and retain in all probability Jewish teachings. This Jewish background is by far more obvious than a problematic appeal to Gnostic myth. About Phil 2:6-11, which con tains the oldest christology of the New Testament, Dieter Georgi has argued that the form of the servant" is a reference to Isaiah's suffering servant. Georgi concludes that such traditions point to hel lenistic Judaism, and more particularly to what he calls "speculative wisdom mysticism.'"68
In this hymn, Christ is first described as having been in the form of God'" (ev popn Beoû iTápxwv [vs 6]). The incarnation is then presented as taking the form of a servant (uopdry Soúkov AaBâv [vs 7]). In order to achieve this metamorphosis, Christ is said to have emptied himself (čavròv ÈKÉVWJEV [vs 7]). Despite numerous studies, this kenosis of Christ has remained rather obscure. Does it refer not to the incarnation, but rather to the cross, as Jeremias holds? Does it mean that Christ divested himself from his divine privileges?69 In my opinion, the notion can be best understood as reflecting an original mythical conception, rather than being simply metaphorical. We may assume that according to this original conception, when Christ was in the form of God," his cosmic body filled the whole world and was identical to the pleroma. Incarnation, therefore, literally implied that Christ emptied the world (or the pleroma) that is, in a sense, himself. The hymn adds that Christ was given by God "the Name which is above every name" (vs 9), in other words, the divine Name. This for mula is strikingly similar to the tradition about Yahoel-Mețațron, according which he received his Master's name.70
 A related conception might be reflected in that puzzling work of early Christian literature, the Odes of Solomon:
 For there is a Helper for me, the Lord He has generously shown Himself to me in his simplicity because His kindness has diminished his rabuta (Odes Sol. 7:3).
 I suggest that rabūtā should be understood here literally, as "great ness,'" size"-and not dreadfulness,"" as the editor J. Charlesworth, translates.71
 The verse would thus be understood as reflecting the kenosis of the hymn in Philippians: incarnation implies for Christ giving up the great ness of his previous gigantic dimensions. This interpretation must remain hypothetical, but one should note that it is strengthened by the next verses in Odes Sol. 7: demūtā and şurtã in vss 4 and 6 would appear to stand for opdh in the hymn of the Philippians.
 The hymn incorporated in Col 1:15-20, which might have been chanted in the liturgy of the first Christian communities,2 is directly relevant to us. Christ is not said here to be in the form of God, but is called image of the invisible God'" (eikav Toô Đeoû đopårov [vs 15]). Now elkáv is, as we have already seen, and as most commentators point out, very close to uopo23 Christ who is the first creature of God (mpwTóToKoŞ TáYs KríTEUŞ ÍVs 1s]), is also the Creator of the world: "since it is in him that all things have been created .. all has been Created through him and for him" (vs 16).
 Now the immediate evocation of the First Adam and the Yoşer Bereshit provided by these traits is much strengthened by the corporeal metaphor: 'And He is also the Head of the Body'" (vs 18),74 and by the following description of the whole pleroma in Him (vs 19). Such an imagery clearly suggests the macrocosmic conception of Christ as the image, or form, of the invisible God.
 The hypothesis developed above-that Jewish conceptions about the archangelic divine hypostasis were reinterpreted and attributed to Christ in some trends of earliest Christianity-can be proven, I think, from a passage in the Gnostic Gospel of Philip. This most interesting text reflects, as is known, some Semitic traditions. Moreover, it obvi ously stems fromn a milieu with a great interest, or stake, in Jewish iden tity, Jewish traditions, or both. A Hebrew makes another Hebrew," So begins the Gos. Phil. It would seem that the text originated in a Jewish-Christian milieu, or among gnosticized Jewish Christians: When we were Hebrews, we were orphans... but when we became
 Christians, we had both father and mother.'"75
 It is noteworthy that the theme of God's name given to his Son also appears in Gos. Phil.: One single name is not uttered in the world, the name which the Father gave to the Son, the name above all things: the name of the Father.76
 Similarly to Markos, moreover,, Gos. Phil. differentiates between the exoteric and esoteric name of the Savior: Jesus' is a hidden name, 'Christ' is a revealed name. "77
 Among some other interesting Semitic etymologies of the Savior's name we read:
 "Messiah" has two meanings, both the Christ" and "the measured." Jesus"" in Hebrew is "the redemption." "Nazara"" is the truth." "Christ" has been measured. The Nazarene" and Jesus'" are they who have been measured 78
 This strange passage has already received some attention. H.-M. Schenke, and after him W. C. van Unnik, have noted the existence of two different isomorphic roots mšh, in both Aramaic and Hebrew, meaning respectively to oint" and to measure. "79
 Pointing out the Semitic original form of the word-play does not in itself bring us closer to a proper understanding of the intention that it obviously carried in its original form (and that Gos. Phil. may no longer understand). So far as I know, such a play on the two isomorphic roots is not found in rabbinic literature. The pun would thus seem to have originated within Hebrew- or Aramaic-speaking early Christian com munities, that is, among Jewish-Christians. This supposition is strengthened by the other allusions in the text, referred to above, to such a background. It is difficult to make sense of this word-play if we do not suppose that its inventor(s) knew Jewish traditions about the figure of the divine hypostasis which was, in contradistinction to God himself, measurable and which had, in other words, a shi'ur qomah. These Jewish-Christians seem to have applied to Christ conceptions previously attributed to Yahoel. They did so without changing the structure of the relation between God and his hypostasis.
 In his note on the passage in Gos. Phil., van Unnik refers to an interesting tradition reported by Irenaeus and possibly related by the Presbyter" explicitly referred to elsewhere in the Adversus haereses:80 "Et bene qui dixit ipsum immensum Patrem in Filio mensuratum: mensura enim Patrem Filius, quoniam et capit eum." In Greek, the last sentence reads: uérpov yàp toÛ TOTpÒs ỏ Yiós, čmeù KOù Xwpel airóu81
 The last clause is difficult to understand. From parallel uses of Xwpeîv-for instance, in Adv. haer. 1.15.5, where Irenaeus describes the Father as he *who contains all things, and is not contained," it would appear that the clause reflects Irenaeus' gloss on the citation "the Son is the measure of the Father,"" and that the subject of xwpeî is God. The verb, moreover, should be understood in a topological sense. This use of xwpel and its equivalents in regard to God, who contains all, in early Christian and Gnostic literature has been remarkably analyzed by W. Schoedel, who has shown its ultimate Platonic origins, 82
 Elsewhere in his magnum opus, Irenaeus insists that since God is "of infinite greatness," he cannot be measured, and remains unknown with respect to this greatness. It is only through Christ, that is, through his love, that God can be known.83 The mythologoumenon reported in Gos. Phl. is indeed the same as that reinterpreted by Irenaeus: being infinite, and including all things, God cannot in any way be known, or measured. Only his Hypostasis, his Son, can be measured. The Son is, therefore, the uérpov of the Father.84 Here again, the structural paral lelism between this conception and that of the relationship between Yahoel-Mețațron and God in the Jewish sources is striking. Since its preservation in Gos. Phil. points to a Jewish-Christian source, the ulti mate origin of the mythologoumenon must be Jewish, rather than Christian. 85
 In conclusion, I would want to suggest a possible etymology for the name metaț ron. Both ếTpOv and the Latin metator, a measurer, have been considered long ago as possible origins of mețatron. Actually the etymology metator> mețatron is already referred to in Genesis Rabba, 86 These attempts, however, have lacked persuasive strength, as long
 as one could not point out that Yahoel-Metatron did not only carry God's name, but also measured Him-was His shi'ur qomah. In the light of the preceding pages, renewed attention should be given to uérpov and/or metator (a conflation of the two terms should not be excluded) as a possible etymology of metatron--a name which does not appear before the Talmudic period,87 Such a suggestion obviously implies some links between Christian and Jewish traditions the first or second century, the nature of which has not yet been deciphered.
 Scholem argued that the Shi'ur Qomah represented "an attempt to give a new turn" to Gnostic dualism, through its insistence upon the identity of the demiurge and the true" God, 88 The results of the present inquiry strengthen the presumption that the direction of the influence might rather have been the opposite. It was Jewish specula tions about the cosmic size of the demiurgic angel, the hypostatic form of God, that both Christians and Gnostics adopted and transformed, each in their own way. While the Christians tended to spiritualize these doctrines by incorporating them into christology, the Gnostics, on the contrary, consciously developed their mythological side, thus opening a gap between God and the demiurge who revolted against his Master.89 The deep ambiguity of the Shi'ur Qomah fragments about the iden tity of the divine figure whose dimensions are given might well stem from this absorption of the Jewish doctrines on the forms of God by both Christians and Gnostics. To the most serious challenge each posed to Jewish monotheistic theology, the Shi'ur Qomah preferred the dangers of crude anthropomorphism, those same dangers which, para doxically enough, the earliest doctrine of the hypostatic form of God had tried to overcome. Rabbinic macrocosmic conceptions of God, indeed, testify to the same dialectic confrontation of problems raised by the biblical text as do some of the earliest strata of christology and of
 Gnostic dualism.
