On The Nature of God: The King Follet Sermon/Sermon in the Grove
Lorenzo Snow once said:
“As man now is, God once was,
As God now is, man may become.”
This couplet has put us at odds with almost the entirety of the general Christian population.  Whether it's accepting the concept of possible deification, or its ideas about how God obtained his perfect body, this doctrine is as awe-inspiring and hopeful as it is controversial.  While I will take time to discuss my thoughts on deification in another essay, the purpose of this discourse is to analyze the first line of this couplet.  Specifically, this essay will conduct an in-depth analysis of the King Follet Discourse and the Sermon in the Grove, where these themes are introduced and most deeply discussed.
According to my research, there seem to be two chief positions regarding God’s nature in mortality.
God was a mortal man, like us, who had/has a Heavenly Father.  God experienced mortality as we are now, and is now an exalted being.
God was a man like Jesus Christ.  He has always been God and only came to “an earth” to receive a glorified body, exactly like Jesus.
It’s important to avoid speculation as much as we can as we discuss this.  Both theories have some decent arguments attached to them, and some problems that are worth addressing.  The fact is that there isn’t a lot talked about regarding the life of God before this life.  Think about it, if it was clear, then we wouldn’t have multiple positions to take on it, would we?  The church has not felt a need to clarify this topic for just that reason.  Whichever theory one ascribes to does not disqualify anyone from being a worthy member of the church, rather shows differing viewpoints that have helped people understand and accept this complex doctrine.  Let's take a look.

The King Follett Sermon and the Sermon in the Grove
King Follett was a dedicated convert, leader, and loyal friend of Joseph Smith.  He died around March of 1844 after being crushed in an accident, and Joseph Smith spoke during General Conference to offer consolation to the family and the saints.  The King Follett Sermon was offered on April 7, 1844.  We have four accounts of the sermon given by Wilford Woodruff, Willard Richards, Thomas Bullock, and William Clayton, leading us to think this was meant to be a significant discourse.  This being said, none of these were taken word for word so there is no "official transcript" for this Sermon (see "Accounts of the King Follett Sermon" on JSP, link here, see also this version which compares the accounts side by side).
It is generally accepted (though I disagree with some of the wording) that Joseph Smith said the following in the King Follett Sermon:
“God himself was once as we are now, and is an exalted man, and sits enthroned in yonder heavens! That is the great secret. If the veil were rent today, and the great God who holds this world in its orbit, and who upholds all worlds and all things by His power, was to make himself visible—I say, if you were to see him today, you would see him like a man in form—like yourselves in all the person, image, and very form as a man; for Adam was created in the very fashion, image and likeness of God, and received instruction from, and walked, talked and conversed with Him, as one man talks and communes with another.
In order to understand the subject of the dead, for consolation of those who mourn for the loss of their friends, it is necessary we should understand the character and being of God and how He came to be so; for I am going to tell you how God came to be God. We have imagined and supposed that God was God from all eternity. I will refute that idea, and take away the veil, so that you may see.
These ideas are incomprehensible to some, but they are simple. It is the first principle of the gospel to know for a certainty the character of God, and to know that we may converse with Him as one man converses with another, and that He was once a man like us; yea, that God himself, the Father of us all, dwelt on an earth, the same as Jesus Christ Himself did; and I will show it from the Bible.
I wish I was in a suitable place to tell it, and that I had the trump of an archangel, so that I could tell the story in such a manner that persecution would cease forever. What did Jesus say? (Mark it, Elder Rigdon!) The scriptures inform us that Jesus said, as the Father hath power in himself, even so hath the Son power—to do what? Why, what the Father did. The answer is obvious—in a manner to lay down his body and take it up again. Jesus, what are you going to do? To lay down my life as my Father did, and take it up again. Do you believe it? If you do not believe it you do not believe the Bible. The scriptures say it, and I defy all the learning and wisdom and all the combined powers of earth and hell together to refute it.” (see link)
Such a controversial speech caused many antagonists of Joseph Smith to accuse him of teaching polytheism. Joseph responded by giving "The Sermon in the Grove" on June 16, 1844.  It states the following.
"I learned it by translating the papyrus which is now in my house. I learned a testimony concerning Abraham, and he reasoned concerning the God of Heaven; in order to do that said he,— ‘suppose we have two facts, that supposes another fact may exist; two men on the earth, one wiser than the other, would logically shew that another who is wiser than the wisest may exist. Intelligences exist one above another, so that there is no end to them.’ If Abraham reasoned thus— if Jesus Christ was the son of God, and John discovered that God the Father of Jesus Christ had a Father, you may suppose that he had a Father also. Where was there ever a son without a father? and where was there ever a father without first being a son? Whenever did a tree or anything spring into existence without a progenitor? And everything comes in this way. Paul says that which is earthly is in the likeness of that which is Heavenly; hence if Jesus had a father, can we not believe that he had a father also? I despise the idea of being scared to death of such doctrine, for the bible is full of it.
I want you all to pay particular attention to what I am saying. Jesus [HC 6:476] said that the Father wrought precisely in the same way as his Father had done before <​him​>— as the Father had done before, he laid down his life and took it up same as his Father had done before; he did as he was sent, to lay down his life and take it up again, and then was committed unto him the Keys &c. I know it is good reasoning." (History, 1838–1856, volume F-1 [1 May 1844–8 August 1844], link found here)
The issue with the King Follett Sermon is that the variations and the contradictions between the ideas found in the four accounts make it impossible for us to be entirely certain of what he said.  One such example will be given later, but even if there was just one singular “King Follett Sermon” to read from, we would still run into the problem of vaguely worded theological concepts.  This is where the diversity of thought comes into play.


Position #1:  God was a man like us
First things first, the strongest bit of evidence of Joseph believing this comes from this passage in the Sermon in the Grove:
“If Abraham reasoned thus— if Jesus Christ was the son of God, and John discovered that God the Father of Jesus Christ had a Father, you may suppose that he had a Father also. Where was there ever a son without a father? and where was there ever a father without first being a son? Whenever did a tree or anything spring into existence without a progenitor?”
This is by far the most commonly espoused theory by members of the church.  It has a few different aspects that make a lot of sense and has the endorsement of several church leaders.  Let’s analyze some quotes.
Not long before this teaching, the recent convert Lorenzo Snow, who was soon to depart on a mission, is recorded to have the following experience:

“While attentively listening to his explanation, the Spirit of the Lord rested mightily upon me—the eyes of my understanding were opened, and I saw as clear as the sun at noonday, with wonder and astonishment, the pathway of God and man. I formed the following couplet which expresses the revelation, as it was shown [to] me, and explains Father Smith’s dark saying to me at a blessing meeting in the Kirtland Temple, prior to my baptism. …
“As man now is, God once was:”
“As God now is, man may be.”
“I felt this to be a sacred communication, which I related to no one except my sister Eliza, until I reached England, when in a confidential private conversation with President Brigham Young, in Manchester, I related to him this extraordinary manifestation.” (Eliza R. Snow, pp. 46–47; italics added. Brigham Young was President of the Quorum of the Twelve at the time.)
“Soon after his return from England, in January, 1843, Lorenzo Snow related to the Prophet Joseph Smith his experience in Elder Sherwood’s home. This was in a confidential interview in Nauvoo. The Prophet’s reply was: ‘Brother Snow, that is a true gospel doctrine, and it is a revelation from God to you.’” (LeRoi C. Snow, Improvement Era, June 1919, p. 656.)
Arguably, this could be used to just show that all people have a resurrected body, but more quotes follow:
"If men that are going to preach the Gospel will do this, the Lord will teach them something, for he is a natural mechanic; and that man is a natural preacher and a natural being who is like his father; for our God is a natural man, and as President Young says, our Heavenly Father is the beginning, the first of all mechanics. Where did he get his knowledge from? From his Father, just as we get knowledge from our earthly parents. Why, bless you, there are men in this Church that knew my grandfather, and I knew my father, and many of you know your fathers." -Heber C. Kimball, Journal of Discourses 8:211 (emphasis added) 
“There are Lords many, and Gods many, for they are called Gods to whom the word of God comes, and the words of God comes to all these kings and priests. But to our branch of the kingdom there is but one God, to whom we all owe the most perfect submission and loyalty; yet our God is subject to still higher intelligences, as we should be to him.” -Orson Hyde, Millenial Star, Jan 17, 1847, pg 24
"Mormon prophets have continuously taught the sublime truth that God the Eternal Father was once a mortal man who passed through a school of earth life similar to that through which we are now passing. He became God-an exalted being...Yet, if we accept the great law of eternal progression, we must accept the fact that there was a time when Deity was much less powerful than He is today...Thus He grew in experience and continued to grow until He attained the status of Godhood." Milton R. Hunter - Mormon Seventy, The Gospel Throughout The Ages, p.110,114-15. (emphasis added)
As implied in the previous quote, some general authorities have gone so far as to support the idea that God is still progressing and learning. For example:
"God himself is increasing and progressing in knowledge, power, and dominion, and will do so, worlds without end."  Wilford Woodruff, Journal of Discourses 6:120
"Some men seem as if they could learn so much and no more. They appear to be bounded in their capacity for acquiring knowledge, as Brother Orson Pratt, has in theory, bounded the capacity of God. According to his theory, God can progress no further in knowledge and power; but the God that I serve is progressing eternally, and so are his children: they will increase to all eternity, if they are faithful” -Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses 11:286. 
This understanding of eternal regression also explains a possible route of continual progression.  It is clear that there is a running trend of general authorities (especially early ones) that seemed to accept this idea of eternal regression.  Whether or not the Journal of Discourses is canonical or not, the idea is present and should be treated with respect.


Position #1 Problems
So there we have it, God was once a man like us, right?  Well, perhaps.  While we have a host of general authorities supporting this theory, a good case can be made that some of these quotes don’t actually mean what people claim they do.  Look at the quote where Heber C. Kimball calls God a natural man.  Do we not assume that Jesus Christ was a natural man?  He had a human form as we do, but clearly, there was more to him than met the eye.  Similar issues to this one continue throughout almost all the quotes.  For instance, Joseph Smith, in his Sermon in the Grove, (while appearing to be open to the idea) seemed only to propose the idea of eternal regression as hypothetical.  He thinks that it MAY be possible that God has a Heavenly Father, or at the very least, he’s not opposed to it.  Treating this idea as undisputable would be unwise just on that premise.
Furthermore, this interpretation seems to go in direct contradiction with other teachings given by Joseph Smith.  Before and after this discourse, we hear Joseph saying the following:
“I believe that there is a God, possessing all the attributes ascribed to Him by all Christians of all denominations; that He reigns over all things in heaven and on earth, and that all are subject to his power.” 
“I believe that God is eternal. That He had no beginning, and can have no end. Eternity means that which is without beginning or end.” (History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts, 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1957), 4:78–79.) 
Latter-day Saints worship “a God in heaven, who is infinite and eternal, from everlasting to everlasting, the same unchangeable God, the framer of heaven and earth, and all things which are in them” (D&C 20:17). 
The Almighty sits enthroned “with glory, honor, power, majesty, might, dominion, truth, justice, judgment, mercy, and an infinity of fulness” (D&C 109:77). 
It's clear from these passages that Joseph taught before and after these sermons that God has always been God.  This also lines up with other scriptural teachings that God has always been God. (See Topical Guide Entry for God, Eternal Nature of; ).  We also know that the concept of God still learning is heavily attacked by the scriptures. (See Topical Guide Entry for God, Omniscience of; )
Furthermore, this poses some other questions with some difficult premises.  How will the Holy Ghost get a body?  How is it that Jesus has always been a deity before and after gaining a body, and our Father in Heaven not?  Wouldn't our Heavenly Father have been God before having a body, the same way Jesus Christ was God before he had a body (Ether 3:14-16)?  If Abraham 3:19, and other scriptures, show the belief that God is the superior being throughout the universe, how could God have a father if that was the case? The list goes on.  (Note:  The trained historical eye understands that there’s more to these issues specifically than meets the eye, but the point remains.)
In our limited understanding, as pointed out, this theory has a few problems.  However, we have to keep in mind that if this was the case, it would make sense that we don't have all the information.  The problems regarding God being eternally God perhaps could be resolved by the same line of logic that we are eternal.  We too have always existed, and we are not complete Gods now.  Perhaps God's situation was like that as well.  It could very well be that God the Father, Jesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost have gone through processes, or are going through processes, that we don't know about (Isaiah 55:8-9).   Our universe is a big place, and understanding the infinities and who God is and was is impossible at the given time.  We just don't know enough to make any solid affirmations regarding eternal regression.  Nevertheless, this theory is still on the table.


Position #2: God was once a man like Jesus Christ
This theory, while comparatively less-universally held, has some rather appealing and convincing arguments.  It revolves around taking some more contextual quotes from the King Follett Discourse and the Sermon on the Grove.
"I wish I was in a suitable place to tell it, and that I had the trump of an archangel, so that I could tell the story in such a manner that persecution would cease forever. What did Jesus say? (Mark it, Elder Rigdon!) The scriptures inform us that Jesus said, as the Father hath power in himself, even so hath the Son power—to do what? Why, what the Father did. The answer is obvious—in a manner to lay down his body and take it up again. Jesus, what are you going to do? To lay down my life as my Father did, and take it up again…What did Jesus do? Why, I do the things I saw my Father do when worlds came rolling into existence. My Father worked out His kingdom with fear and trembling, and I must do the same;" (KFS, link above)
Another account of the KFS given by Thomas Bullock states the following:
"I am going to tell you what sort of a being is God, for he was God from the beginning of all eternity & if I do not refute it_truth is the touchstone they are the simple and first principles of truth to know for a certainty the character of God" 
Remember also Joseph's words in the Sermon in the Grove:
"I want you all to pay particular attention to what I am saying. Jesus [HC 6:476] said that the Father wrought precisely in the same way as his Father had done before <​him​>— as the Father had done before, he laid down his life and took it up same as his Father had done before; he did as he was sent, to lay down his life and take it up again, and then was committed unto him the Keys &c. I know it is good reasoning." (SIG, link above)
Now, this last one is a little trickier, because you'll notice that the wording for the Sermon in the Grove is a bit confusing here.  However, let’s break it down.  It says that the Father “wrought” something.  “Wrought”, according to the 1828 Webster’s dictionary, means “worked” or “effected”.  In other words, the Father did/was bringing about exactly what had been done before.  What was done before?  Laying down, and taking up again of a mortal body.  However, who did it before?  Was it Jesus Christ’s Father, or was it God the Father’s Father?  Look at the uses of “he” and “him” in this quote.  Putting in God the Father doesn’t seem to match this quote and its message properly, especially if you look at the last part of the quote.  So, what are we to make of this?
By analyzing the paragraphs here, a convincing argument is made that God was a man very similar to how Jesus Christ was a man, and consequently, has never learned anything, because He knows everything.  This is what Brigham Young alluded to when he talked about Orson Pratt’s “Theory”.  In fact, in a similar manner, we read that President George Albert Smith used the same wording to identify and discuss the divine nature of Jesus Christ.
“Not only do we believe that Jesus of Nazareth lived upon the earth, but we believe that he still lives, not as an essence, not as something incorporeal or intangible, but we believe in him as an exalted man; for he arose with the same body that was laid in the tomb of Joseph of Arimathaea, the same body that was ministered to there by those who loved him.” -Deseret News, Dec. 27, 1924, Church section, 6. (Cited in Teachings of the Presidents of the Church Series)
This position asserts that He (God the Father) took on himself a mortal body and was on earth living a sinless life, the same as Jesus Christ did.  He would’ve been born of a mortal, died, and taken up his body again, just as Christ did.  He "worked out his own salvation" as Joseph Smith says.
This is supported and endorsed by Blake Ostler in his book "Exploring Mormon Thought".  He says:
"It seems fairly clear to me that Joseph Smith had [the Father being born as a mortal] in mind and not [the Father being spiritually begotten by another Father above him]. First, immediately after discussing the fact that generation of a son necessarily requires a father, he states: "I want you to pay particular attention to what I am saying. Jesus said that the Father wrought precisely in the same way as His Father had done before Him. As the Father had done before? He [Jesus] laid down His life, and took it up the same as His Father had done before." Thus, Joseph returns to the same explanatory principle that he had in the King Follett discourse. The Son as a mortal does "precisely" what the Father did before him." -Blake T. Ostler, Exploring Mormon Thought Vol. 2: The Problems With Theism And the Love of God (Salt Lake City, Utah: Greg Kofford Books, 2006)
From President Charles W. Penrose (an apostle), here is a combination of two quotes about the King Follet Sermon, and the relationship of the father and the Son.
"In this 5th Chapter of John, Jesus goes on to explain to the people that He did nothing of Himself, but that which the Father sent Him to do, that He did; and He said, "The Son doeth nothing but what He seeth the Father do, for the Father loveth the Son and showeth Him all things that He Himself doeth." (verse 20.) Now, if the Father, in the course of His great experience as revealed through the Prophet Joseph, had passed through the "estate" of mortals that He might be placed in the same conditions of trial, so was Jesus thus placed, and the Lord showed to Jesus all about this. He showed to Him all about the organization of the worlds. "The Father loveth the Son and showeth Him all things that He Himself doeth, and He will show Him greater works than these, that ye may marvel;" so we read. Then He goes on to tell, in regard to the resurrection, from the dead, what will become of all people. All being brought forth from their graves through His power as "the resurrection and the life," some to eternal life and glory and some to everlasting condemnation. That being the case, He [Christ] understood all about it by sight, and the time being set when lie should come to the earth and take a body, He was qualified to do that for which He was appointed in the beginning...He was an exalted man who had passed through all things that Jesus Christ, His Beloved Son, afterwards passed through. It was a repetition of the things that had been done from remote, eternal ages, the great plan of salvation for all the people of all the worlds that God has created." -President Charles W. Penrose, April 1916 conference (pages 13-24), (emphasis added)
This argument has some great advantages to it, addressing some of the concerns that Position #1 cannot solve (Reconciling JS's teachings on God being the most high, teaching that God has always been God, etc.)  This belief aligns very well with the OT's understanding of God and can be more easily defended.


Position #2 Problems
I’ve already discussed previously how the vagueness of the wording of the Sermon in the Grove may indicate uncertainty in the quote’s validity with this argument.  Furthermore, this idea is by no means supported widely, let alone universally, by church membership.  It also has a long history of church leaders who seemed to understand that God the Father has a Heavenly Father, something that isn't addressed at all in Position #2.  Proponents of Position #2 could say that most of those statements "aren't doctrine", but it doesn't change the fact that those general authorities got that idea of Position #1 from somewhere.  From a historical standpoint, it would be unjust and disingenuous to write off their perspectives on the matter.
There are also some difficult theological questions involved.  Doesn't this also imply a maximum limit to the possible things we can know?  If Jesus, having the capacity to learn (Luke 2:52), was still a God, doesn't that also mean that our Heavenly Father could also have, or have had the capacity to learn?  Granted, one could counter this complaint with the fact that what Jesus “learned” is how to experience life and use a human body, but as you can see, the point about his learning remains.  Wouldn’t the exception, in this case, defeat the rule?
Again, Position #2 is fairly new.  It may take several years for general authorities to make any comments on it if they choose to address it at all.  It would be unfair to say that position #2 is impossible because this could just be something that only makes sense to God.  Even so, this theory is also on the table.


Conclusion
The church has no official position on this issue, instead allowing members to study and come to their own conclusions.  I can honestly see the validity and value of both positions, I personally have no preference.  While I find the theological presuppositions of Position #1 to be fulfilling, I find the defensible nature of Position #2 to be fulfilling, and quite appealing from a debating standpoint.  The church is true regardless of what happens.
Missionaries who are confronted with this issue have difficult decisions to make, should their investigators be exposed to this topic prematurely.  Missionaries need to instruct people about the gospel, and people don’t like it when prophets, leaders, or even members seem to disagree with each other.  One must remember that our theology accommodates differing opinions, and the disagreement itself poses no threat to our theology.  Don’t ignore or look down on those who support a position you disagree with, and should you feel the need, you can absolutely affirm that there are some members who disagree, and that’s okay*.  These are all just theories.  Be honest in how you present the information, and take special care to follow the spirit.
I actively welcome new information and am confident that more information will come to light concerning the matter.  In the meantime, I will continue to accept new information and look forward to more revelation in the future about the Nature of God even if that information comes during or after the Millennium.




Additional Thought:
This is a part of a critical response I wrote (but never used) to a pamphlet from Apologia Church when they talk about the idea that the church “Actively teaches the concept of eternal regression”.  It’s a synthesized version of this essay and has some additional thoughts.
Let's talk about the King Follett sermon.  This is a highly disputed sermon among the scholars of the LDS community due to the conflicting accounts of the sermon.  Thomas Bullock, for instance, recorded that Joseph taught that God was a God from all eternity, while others who recorded the sermon stated otherwise, or were unclear as to what Joseph said.  Anyone can read these accounts on the Joseph Smith Papers website here, and I highly recommend that you do.

It is also contested how the sermon is to be interpreted.  Historically speaking, many members, and arguably some general authorities, believed that God the Father was the subject of this speech, and we are to understand this speech as such.  Joseph Smith himself seemed to wonder if this was the case, saying he "I despise the idea of being scared to death of such doctrine" -History, 1838–1856, volume F-1 [1 May 1844–8 August 1844].  However, not even he necessarily espouses firmly to the idea.

Other LDS church members and even general authorities have stated in the past what they believe on the matter, and have even taught their opinions that reject the kind of eternal regression of Gods.  Take for instance author Blake Ostler's comments on the sermon:

"It seems fairly clear to me that Joseph Smith had [the Father being born as a mortal] in mind and not [the Father being spiritually begotten by another Father above him]. First, immediately after discussing the fact that generation of a son necessarily requires a father, he states: "I want you to pay particular attention to what I am saying. Jesus said that the Father wrought precisely in the same way as His Father had done before Him. As the Father had done before? He [Jesus] laid down His life, and took it up the same as His Father had done before." Thus, Joseph returns to the same explanatory principle that he had in the King Follett discourse. The Son as a mortal does "precisely" what the Father did before him." (Blake T. Ostler, Exploring Mormon Thought Vol. 2: The Problems With Theism And the Love of God (Salt Lake City, Utah: Greg Kofford Books, 2006))
This was published years ago, as you can see, yet Blake Ostler is still an active member of the LDS church, and well respected among the academics of the LDS community.  If the General Authorities were so keen on ensuring that every member was uniformly united in their opinions regarding the sermon, why not reprimand or excommunicate him?

But let’s pretend for a moment that your interpretation is correct.  The fact of the matter is that even though prophets like Joseph Smith and Brigham Young had chances time and time again to canonize and officialize their thoughts regarding these opinions, they did not.  If this is something that they required every member to believe, why not canonize it?  Why not make it part of the temple recommend questions? There's a reason why you can only find these teachings in the Journal of Discourses and the History of the Church, because the church leaves it open to interpretation.  This teaching was never intended to be passed off as words that everyone within the church was supposed to adhere to in order to be a member.  If you believe otherwise, the burden of proof is on you to demonstrate why.

*Granted, I understand missionary work.  Most of you struggle just to get people to keep commitments, so deep theological discussion is likely not on the table for you anyways.  I also warn you to be wise though, because deliberate antagonists of the church might take this idea of disagreement and use it as an argument of “oh the church can’t even agree on their own theology, therefore they must be false!”  Granted, they do so ignorantly of the obvious double standard they’re holding the church, but the point remains that many will twist what you say.  Learn to recognize when this is occurring, and don’t cast pearls before swine.
