Whether your goal is to buy a smartphone or find a part-time job, you will interact with other people in markets. A market is a group of buyers and sellers of a good or service and the institution or arrangement by which they come together to trade. Examples of markets are the markets for smartphones, houses, haircuts, stocks and bonds, and labor. Most of economics involves analyzing how people make choices and interact in markets. Here are the three important ideas about markets that we’ll return to frequently:

People are rational.﻿﻿
People respond to economic incentives.
Optimal decisions are made at the margin.

People Are Rational
Economists generally assume that people are rational. This assumption does not mean that economists believe everyone knows everything or always makes the “best” decision. It means that economists assume that consumers and firms use all available information as they act to achieve their goals. Rational individuals weigh the benefits and costs of each action, and they choose an action only if the benefits outweigh the costs. For example, if Apple charges a price of $999 for its new iPhone, economists assume that the managers at Apple have estimated that this price will earn the company the most profit. Even though the managers may be wrong—maybe a price of $949 or $1,049 would be more profitable—economists assume that the managers at Apple have acted rationally, on the basis of the information available to them, in choosing the price of $999. Although not everyone behaves rationally all the time, the assumption of rational behavior is very useful in explaining most of the choices that people make.


People Respond to Economic Incentives
People act from a variety of motives, including envy, compassion, anger, and religious belief. While not ignoring other motives, economists emphasize that individuals and firms consistently respond to economic incentives. This point may seem obvious, but it is often overlooked. For example, you probably see news stories about banks or stores being robbed. You may think that the robbers didn’t take the time to first weigh the economic benefit—the money from the robbery—against the economic cost—the time spent in jail if arrested. Yet, there is evidence that people considering committing crimes do respond to economic incentives. Most states require anyone convicted of a felony to submit a DNA sample. The samples are entered into databases that police check when investigating crimes. DNA databases increase the likelihood that someone who commits a crime will be arrested, thereby reducing the economic incentive to commit crimes by raising the cost. But the DNA will reduce the number of crimes committed only if criminals respond to the increase in cost. Jennifer Doleac, an economist at Texas A&M University, has analyzed the effects of adopting DNA testing and found that “the requirement to submit a DNA sample reduces the likelihood of a new conviction within five years by … 17 percent for serious violent offenders.” To an economist, it’s not surprising that even criminals respond to economic incentives.

One of our three key economic ideas is that people respond to economic incentives. Government policy can change the economic incentives that people face. For example, taxing cigarettes will cause some people to reduce or quit smoking. A government policy, however, can have unintended consequences by changing economic incentives in a way that policymakers didn’t anticipate. Some economists argue that this was the case with the Biden administration’s decision in August 2022 to change the federal student loan program.

In the past 25 years, college students and their parents have rapidly increased their loan debt. The following figure shows the total value of outstanding student loans, beginning in 2000. Student loan debt increased from about $52 billion in 2000 to about $1.5 trillion at the beginning of 2023. Or, put another way, for every $1 of student loan debt students and their parents owed in 2000, they owed more than $25 of debt in 2023. In 2022, the average borrower owed about $29,000.

During the Covid–19 pandemic, the Trump and Biden administrations allowed people with student loans to suspend making payments on the loans. The payment moratorium began March 31, 2020, and ended September 30, 2023. Student loan payments are often a recent college graduate’s largest bill. Some economists argue that these payments make it harder for young adults to accumulate the down payments necessary to buy homes. As a result, young adults are likely to delay forming families, thereby reducing their need to move from an apartment to a house. In 1967, about 83 percent of people aged 25 to 34 lived with a spouse or partner, while in 2021, only about 54 percent did.

Other economists doubt that student loan debt is the main reason that some young adults have delayed forming families and buying houses. Still, many policymakers consider reducing the burden of student loan debt on young adults an important issue. In August 2022, President Joe Biden announced a plan under which:
Individuals earning less than $125,000 per year would have up to $10,000 in student loan debt canceled.
Borrowers with Pell grants would have up to an additional $10,000 canceled.
Lower- and middle-income student loan borrowers will be able to more easily have their loan balances canceled due to changes in the income-driven repayment (IDR) program. With some exceptions, borrowers with loans of $12,000 or less will have their loans canceled after making payments for 10 years, rather than the current 20 years. The annual payments for most borrowers using the IDR program will be lowered from 10 percent to 5 percent of their income above about $33,000 per year.

Some policymakers objected to President Biden’s plan, arguing that it was unconstitutional because it was the result of a presidential executive order rather than the result of congressional legislation. (In June 2023, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled the debt cancellation parts of the plan were unconstitutional.) Many economists focused on a different potential problem with the plan: the economic incentives that might result from the changes to the IDR program. The intention of these changes was to reduce the burden on people who currently have student loans, but the changes also affected the economic incentives presented to students applying for loans and to colleges deciding the level of tuition to charge.

In an article on the Brookings Institution website, Adam Looney, a professor of finance at the University of Utah, argued that because of the changes to the IDR program, a typical college student could expect to pay back only about 50 percent of the amount borrowed. Before the changes, the Congressional Budget Office had estimated that the typical student would end up paying more than 100 percent of the amount borrowed because the student would have to pay interest on the loan amount. Looney argues that students and their parents will have an incentive to borrow more because they will expect to pay back only half of the amount borrowed. In particular, Looney notes:

A large share of student debt is not used to pay tuition, but is given to students in cash for rent, food, and other expenses…. While students certainly need to pay rent and buy food while in school, under the administration proposal a student can borrow significant amounts for “living expenses,” deposit the check in a bank account, and not pay it all back…. Some people will use loans like an ATM, which will be costly for taxpayers and is certainly not the intended use of the loans.

Sylvain Catherine, a professor of finance at the University of Pennsylvania’s Wharton School, makes a similar argument: “How can we not anticipate the distortionary effects of such a policy? Students will be encouraged to take more debt since they will not have to repay [all of the additional funds they borrow], and colleges will have an incentive to further increase tuition.” An article in the New York Times noted that taxpayers will be responsible for the value of student loans that aren’t paid back: “By offering more-generous educational subsidies, the government may be creating a perverse incentive for both schools and borrowers, who could begin to pay even less attention to the actual price tag of their education—and taxpayers could be left footing more of the bill.”

In late 2023, it was too early to judge the extent to which students, their families, and colleges would react to the changed incentives in President Biden’s student debt relief plan. But because the plan changes economic incentives, it may result in consequences not intended by President Biden and his advisers. Lawsuits challenging the constitutionality of the forgiveness plan were also not yet resolved in the courts.



Optimal Decisions Are Made at the Margin
Some decisions are “all or nothing.” For instance, when an entrepreneur decides whether to open a new restaurant, she starts the new restaurant or she doesn’t. When you decide whether to attend graduate school, you either enroll in graduate school or you don’t. But rather than being all or nothing, most decisions in life involve doing a little more or a little less. If you are trying to decrease your spending and increase your saving, the decision is not really between saving all the money you earn or spending it all. Rather, many small choices are involved, such as whether to buy a caffé mocha at Starbucks every day or just once a week.

Economists use the word marginal to mean “extra” or “additional.” Comparing the marginal benefit (MB) of an activity to its marginal cost (MC) can help us make decisions. For example:
Should you watch another hour of television or spend that hour studying? The marginal benefit of watching more television is the additional enjoyment you receive. The marginal cost is the reduction in your test score from having studied a little less.
Should Apple produce an additional 300,000 iPhones? Firms receive revenue from selling goods. Apple’s marginal benefit is the additional revenue it receives from selling 300,000 more iPhones. Apple’s marginal cost is the additional cost—for wages, parts, and so forth—of producing 300,000 more iPhones.

Economists reason that the optimal decision is to continue any activity up to the point where the marginal benefit equals the marginal cost—that is, to the point where MB=MC.

Often, we apply this rule without consciously thinking about it. Usually, you will know, without giving the decision a lot of thought, whether the additional enjoyment from watching a television program is worth the additional cost you pay by not spending that hour studying. In business situations, however, firms often have to make careful calculations to determine, for example, whether the additional revenue received from increasing production of a good is greater or less than the additional cost of the production. Marginal analysis involves comparing marginal benefits and marginal costs.

----

In mid-March 2020, during the Covid–19 pandemic, the Walt Disney Company closed its Walt Disney World theme parks in Orlando, Florida. During the time the parks were closed, the Disney Company still had to pay for utilities, maintenance of the parks, and wages for some employees. In late May, the company announced that, with the approval of the Florida government, it would reopen Disney World in mid-July. An article in the Wall Street Journal noted that the company’s costs would increase because to reduce the chance that visitors would contract the virus while in the parks, employees would have to do additional cleaning, reconfigure restaurants and rides, and check customers’ temperatures. At the same time, the company’s revenue would likely fall because fewer people were expected to buy tickets to the parks or to stay in the company’s hotels. After Disney World reopened, could the Disney Company be sure that the revenue it earned would be greater than the costs of operating the parks? If not, why might the Disney Company still have chosen to reopen Disney World?

Solving the Problem
﻿
Step 1:
Review the chapter material. This problem is about making decisions, so you may want to review the section “Optimal Decisions Are Made at the Margin.”
﻿
Step 2:
Use the information in the problem to explain how the Disney Company should have decided whether to reopen Disney World during the pandemic. The problem tells us that the Disney Company had costs associated with Walt Disney World even when the parks were closed and the company was earning no revenue from them. So, the company was suffering a loss. Therefore, the company’s goal in reopening Disney World was to at least reduce the size of the loss, even if it was not able to earn a profit.

The Disney Company needed to apply marginal analysis when deciding whether to open Disney World. The company’s costs would be higher than normal, and its revenue would be lower than normal. But as long as the additional revenue, or marginal revenue, the company earned from the parks being open was greater than the additional cost, or marginal cost, of operating the parks, the company should have chosen to reopen Disney World.


1.2 The Economic Problem That Every Society Must Solve



Because we live in a world of scarcity, any society faces the economic problem that it has only a limited quantity of economic resources—such as workers, machines, and raw materials—and so can produce only a limited amount of goods and services. Therefore, every society faces trade-offs: Producing more of one good or service means producing less of another good or service. The best measure of the cost of producing a good or service is the value of what has to be given up to produce it. The opportunity cost of any activity is the highest-valued alternative that must be given up to engage in that activity. The concept of opportunity cost is very important in economics and applies to individuals, firms, and society as a whole. For instance, suppose that you earn a salary of $100,000 per year working as a manager for Apple. You decide to leave your job and open your own information technology consulting firm. In this case, the opportunity cost of the labor you supply to your own firm is the $100,000 you give up by not working for Apple, even if you do not explicitly pay yourself a salary. As in this example, opportunity costs often do not involve actual payments of money.

Trade-offs force society to make choices when answering three fundamental questions:
What goods and services will be produced?
How will the goods and services be produced?
Who will receive the goods and services produced?
Throughout this book, we will return to these questions many times. For now, we briefly introduce each question.

What Goods and Services Will Be Produced?
How will society decide whether to produce more economics textbooks or more smartphones? More daycare facilities or more football stadiums? Of course, “society” doesn’t make decisions; only individuals make decisions. The answer to the question of what will be produced is determined by the choices of three groups:
Consumers: You help decide which goods and services firms will produce when you choose to buy an iPhone instead of a Samsung Galaxy or a caffè mocha rather than a chai latte.
Firms: In response to consumers’ choices, Apple must choose whether to devote the company’s scarce resources to making more iPhones or more smartwatches.
Government: Members of Congress and the president must choose whether to spend more of the federal government’s limited budget on breast cancer research or on repairing highways.

In each case, consumers, managers of firms, and government policymakers face the problem of scarcity by trading off one good or service for another. And each choice made comes with an opportunity cost, measured by the value of the best alternative given up.

How Will the Goods and Services Be Produced?
Firms choose how to produce the goods and services they sell. In many cases, firms face a trade-off between using more workers and using more machines. For example:
A local service station has to choose whether to provide car repair services using more diagnostic computers and fewer auto mechanics or fewer diagnostic computers and more auto mechanics.
A movie studio has to choose whether to produce animated films using highly skilled animators to draw them by hand or using fewer animators and more computers.
A firm may have to choose between a production method in the United States that uses fewer workers and more machines and a production method in Mexico that uses more workers and fewer machines.

Who Will Receive the Goods and Services Produced?
In the United States, who receives the goods and services produced depends largely on how income is distributed. The higher your income, the more goods and services you can buy. Often, people are willing to give up some of their income—and, therefore, some of their ability to purchase goods and services—by donating to charities to increase the incomes of poorer people. Americans donate more than $450 billion per year to charity, or an average donation of about $3,700 for each household in the country. An important policy question, however, is whether the government should intervene to make the distribution of income more equal. Such intervention already occurs in the United States because people with higher incomes pay a larger fraction of their incomes in taxes and because the government makes payments to people with low incomes and provides services to them, such as Medicaid medical insurance and assistance in buying food through the Supplemental Nutritional Assistance Program (SNAP). There is disagreement over whether the current attempts to redistribute income are sufficient or whether there should be more or less redistribution.



Centrally Planned Economies versus Market Economies
To answer the three questions—what, how, and who—societies organize their economies in two main ways. A society can have a centrally planned economy, in which the government decides how economic resources will be allocated. Or a society can have a market economy, in which the decisions of households and firms as they interact in markets determine the allocation of economic resources.

Centrally Planned Economies
From 1917 to 1991, the most important centrally planned economy in the world was that of the Soviet Union, which was established when Vladimir Lenin and the Communist Party staged a revolution and took control of the Russian Empire. In the Soviet Union, the government decided what goods to produce, how the goods would be produced, and who would receive the goods. Government employees managed factories and stores. The objective of these managers was to follow the government’s orders rather than to satisfy the wants of consumers. Centrally planned economies like that of the Soviet Union have failed to produce low-cost, high-quality goods and services, so the standard of living of the average person in a centrally planned economy tends to be low. All centrally planned economies have also been political dictatorships. Dissatisfaction with low living standards and political repression finally led to the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991. Today, only North Korea still has a completely centrally planned economy, although in some other countries, such as Cuba and Venezuela, the government has a large role in planning economic activity.

Market Economies
All high-income democracies, including the United States, Canada, Japan, and the countries of Western Europe, have market economies. Market economies rely primarily on privately owned firms to produce goods and services and to decide how to produce them. Markets, rather than the government, determine who receives the goods and services produced. In a market economy, firms must produce goods and services that meet the wants of consumers, or the firms will go out of business. In that sense, it is ultimately consumers who decide what will be produced. Because firms in a market economy compete to offer the highest-quality products at the lowest price, they are under pressure to use the lowest-cost methods of production. For example, as we saw in the chapter opener, Apple assembles its iPhones mainly in China and India rather than in the United States.

In a market economy, the income of an individual is determined by the payments he or she receives for what he or she has to sell. If you become a civil engineer, and firms are willing to pay a salary of $85,000 per year for someone with your training and skills, you will have this amount of income to purchase goods and services. If you also buy a house that you rent out, your income will be even higher. One of the attractive features of markets is that they reward hard work. Generally, the more extensive the training you receive and the more hours you work, the higher your income will be. Of course, luck—both good and bad—also plays a role here. Someone might have a high income because she won the state lottery, while someone else might have a low income because he has severe medical problems. We can conclude that market economies respond to the question “Who receives the goods and services produced?” with the answer “Those who are most willing and able to buy them.”

The Modern “Mixed” Economy
In the 1800s and early 1900s, the U.S. government engaged in relatively little regulation of markets for goods and services. Beginning in the mid-1900s, government intervention in the economy dramatically increased in the United States and other market economies due primarily to the high rates of unemployment and business bankruptcies during the Great Depression of the 1930s. Some government intervention was also intended to raise the incomes of people who are elderly, people who are sick, and people with limited skills. For example, in the 1930s, Congress established the Social Security system, which provides government payments to retired and disabled workers, and enacted minimum wage legislation, which sets a floor on the wages employers can pay workers in many occupations. In more recent years, government intervention in the economy has also expanded to meet goals such as protecting the environment, promoting civil rights, and expanding access to medical care.

Some economists argue that the extent of government intervention makes it no longer accurate to refer to the economies of the United States, Canada, Japan, and Western Europe as pure market economies. Instead, these countries are considered mixed economies because, while most economic decisions result from the interaction of buyers and sellers in markets, the government plays a significant role in the allocation of resources.
One of the most important developments in the international economy in recent years has been the movement of China from being a centrally planned economy to being a mixed economy. The Chinese economy suffered decades of economic stagnation following the takeover of the government in 1949 by Mao Zedong and the Communist Party. Although China remains a political dictatorship, the production of most goods and services is now determined in the market rather than by the government. The result has been rapid economic growth that has lifted more than a billion people in China out of poverty. In the past few years, China’s leader Xi Jinping has taken steps to increase the role of the government in the economy by expanding the role of firms owned by the government and by placing more restrictions on the activities of private firms. It remains to be seen whether the government having a larger role in the economy will significantly reduce economic growth, which would slow the increase in the standard of living of the average Chinese household.

Efficiency and Equity
Market economies tend to be more efficient than centrally planned economies. There are two types of efficiency:
﻿Productive efficiency occurs when a good or service is produced at the lowest possible cost.
﻿Allocative efficiency occurs when production is in accordance with consumer preferences.

Markets tend to be efficient because they promote competition and facilitate voluntary exchange. With voluntary exchange, both the buyer and the seller of a product are made better off by the transaction. We know that they are both made better off because, otherwise, the buyer would not have agreed to buy the product or the seller would not have agreed to sell it. Productive efficiency is achieved when competition among firms forces them to produce goods and services at the lowest cost. Allocative efficiency is achieved when the combination of competition among firms and voluntary exchange between firms and consumers results in firms producing the mix of goods and services that consumers prefer the most. Competition will result in firms continuing to produce and sell goods and services as long as the additional benefit to consumers is greater than the additional cost of production. In this way, the mix of goods and services produced will match consumer preferences.

Although markets promote efficiency, they don’t guarantee it. Inefficiency can arise from various sources. For instance, it may take some time for firms to learn how to efficiently produce a good or service. When smartphones were introduced, firms did not instantly achieve productive efficiency because it took time to discover the lowest-cost method of producing them. As we will discuss in later chapters, inefficiency can also arise if governments interfere with voluntary exchange in markets. For example, many governments limit the imports of some goods from foreign countries. Doing so reduces efficiency by keeping goods from being produced at the lowest cost, a point we discuss further in the Apply the Concept “What Can Economics Contribute to the Debate over Tariffs?” in Section 1.3. The production of some goods damages the environment. Without government intervention, firms may ignore the costs of environmental damage and thereby fail to produce the goods at the lowest possible cost. In such situations, government intervention may increase efficiency.

Not everyone will consider a particular outcome to be desirable, even if the outcome is economically efficient. Many people prefer economic outcomes that they consider fair or equitable, even if those outcomes are less efficient than other outcomes. Equity is harder to define than efficiency because there isn’t an agreed-upon definition of fairness. For some people, equity means a more equal distribution of economic benefits than would result from an emphasis on efficiency alone. For example, some people support raising taxes on people with higher incomes to provide funds for programs that aid people with low incomes. Although governments may increase equity by reducing the incomes of people with high incomes and increasing the incomes of people with low incomes, these policies may reduce efficiency. People have less incentive to open new businesses, work hard, and save if the government takes a significant amount of the income they earn from working or saving. As a result, fewer goods and services are produced, and less saving takes place. As this example illustrates, there is often a trade-off between efficiency and equity. Government policymakers frequently confront this trade-off.



As mentioned at the start of the chapter, economic models are simplified versions of reality used to analyze real-world economic situations. (This book uses the words model and theory interchangeably.) Many professions rely on models. Today, most models are mathematical and are analyzed using computer programs. For example:
An engineer may use a computer model of a bridge to help test whether it will withstand high winds.
A biologist may use a computer model of a nucleic acid to better understand its properties.
Economists rely on models, or theories, to analyze real-world issues ranging from the effects of tariffs on the prices of imported goods to the most efficient policies for reducing pollution. One purpose of economic models is to make economic ideas sufficiently explicit and concrete so that individuals, firms, or the government can use them to make decisions. For example, we will see in Chapter 3 that the model of demand and supply is a simplified version of how the prices of products are determined by the interactions among buyers and sellers in markets.
Economists use economic models to answer questions such as “How many people will be employed in manufacturing in 2031?” Economists at the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) build models that allow them to forecast future employment in different occupations. The BLS models provide estimates of future demand for U.S. manufacturing production and estimates of how many employees manufacturing firms will require to produce that level of output. As mentioned at the beginning of the chapter, the BLS forecasts that employment in manufacturing will decline by 2031.
Sometimes economists use an existing model to analyze a real-world problem or issue, but in other cases, they have to develop a new model. To develop a model, economists generally follow these steps:
Decide on the assumptions to use.
Formulate a testable hypothesis.
Use economic data to test the hypothesis.
Revise the model if it fails to explain the economic data well.
Retain the revised model to help answer similar economic questions in the future.
The Role of Assumptions in Economic Models
Any model is based on assumptions because models have to be simplified to be useful. Economic models make behavioral assumptions about the motives of consumers and firms. Economists assume that consumers will buy the goods and services that will maximize their well-being or their satisfaction. Similarly, economists assume that firms act to maximize their profits. These assumptions are simplifications because they do not describe the motives of every consumer and every firm. How can we know whether the assumptions in a model are too simplified or too limiting? We can determine the usefulness of assumptions by forming hypotheses based on the assumptions and then testing the hypotheses using real-world information.


Forming and Testing Hypotheses in Economic Models
An economic variable is something measurable that can have different values, such as the number of people employed in manufacturing. In an economic model, a hypothesis is a statement about an economic variable that may be either correct or incorrect. An example of a hypothesis in an economic model is the statement that increased use of industrial robots and information technology in U.S. factories has caused a decline in manufacturing employment. The hypothesis may be correct if the main effect of industrial robots has been to replace assembly line workers, thereby reducing employment. Or the hypothesis may be incorrect if the use of robots and other information technology has increased firms’ demand for software programmers and other technology workers, thereby increasing employment. An economic hypothesis is usually about a causal relationship; in this case, the hypothesis states that increased use of robots and information technology has caused, or led to, lower employment in manufacturing.
Before we can accept a hypothesis, we have to test it by analyzing statistics, or data, on the relevant economic variables. In our example, we could gather (1) data on how the use of industrial robots and information technology in manufacturing has changed over time and (2) data on changes in employment in manufacturing. Testing a hypothesis can be tricky. For example, showing that employment in manufacturing declined at the same time that the use of robots increased would not be enough to demonstrate that the increased use of robots caused the decline in employment. Just because two things are correlated—that is, they happen at the same time—does not mean that one causes the other.
For example, suppose that at the same time that the use of robots in U.S. manufacturing was increasing, U.S. manufacturing firms faced declining sales due to increased competition from foreign firms. In that case, the declining sales, rather than the increased use of robots, might explain the decrease in U.S. manufacturing employment. Distinguishing between correlation and causality when analyzing economic relationships is a key task of economic analysis. An additional complication in economic analysis is that over a period of time, the values of many economic variables change, which makes it more difficult to test hypotheses focused on just two of those variables. Because evaluating a hypothesis is usually not straightforward, when economists disagree about a hypothesis, it is often because they disagree on how to interpret the statistical analysis used to test the hypothesis.

Note that hypotheses must be statements that could, in principle, turn out to be incorrect. Statements such as “Increasing employment in manufacturing is good” or “Increasing employment in manufacturing is bad” are value judgments rather than hypotheses because it is not possible to disprove them.
Economists accept and use an economic model if it leads to hypotheses that are confirmed by statistical analysis. In many cases, the acceptance is tentative, however, pending the gathering of new data or further statistical analysis. In fact, economists often label a hypothesis as “not rejected” rather than as “accepted” by statistical analysis. But what if statistical analysis clearly rejects a hypothesis? For example, what if a model leads to a hypothesis that increased use of industrial robots will cause a decline in manufacturing employment, but the data reject this hypothesis? In this case, the model should be reconsidered. It may be that an assumption used in the model was too simplified or too limiting. For example, perhaps the model ignored the fact that the mix of products being manufactured in the United States was changing. The assembly of electric cars might require more workers than does the assembly of gasoline-powered cars. Or perhaps the model did not include the effect of tariffs on the demand for U.S. manufactured goods because such tariffs had previously been lower. If tariffs sharply increase, the model may not be able to accurately estimate the relationship between changes in the use of industrial robots and changes in employment.
As we saw at the beginning of the chapter, the BLS has forecast that total employment in U.S. manufacturing will decline from 13.0 million in August 2023 to 12.2 million in 2031. The BLS periodically analyzes the accuracy of its projections. It has had difficulty accurately projecting manufacturing employment. For example, in 2000, the BLS projected that in 2010, 19,047,000 people would be employed in manufacturing. In fact, in 2010, only 11,529,000 people were employed in manufacturing. The BLS concluded that this large error was the result of its model failing to account for the extent to which U.S. firms would move manufacturing operations overseas, how quickly firms would improve their ability to produce the same output with fewer workers, and the lasting effects of the severe 2007–2009 recession. Analyzing its errors helps the BLS improve its models and employment projections.
The process of developing models, testing hypotheses, and revising models occurs not just in economics but also in disciplines such as physics, chemistry, and biology. This process is often called the scientific method. Economics is a social science because it applies the scientific method to the study of interactions among individuals.

Throughout this book, as we build economic models and use them to answer questions, bear in mind the following important distinction:
﻿Positive analysis is concerned with what is.
﻿Normative analysis is concerned with what ought to be.
Economics is about positive analysis, which measures the costs and benefits of different courses of action.
We can use the federal government’s minimum wage law to compare positive and normative analysis. In June 2023, under this law, it was illegal for an employer to hire a worker at a wage less than $7.25 per hour. (Some states and cities had enacted higher minimum wages.) Without the minimum wage law, some firms and workers would voluntarily agree to a lower wage. Because of the minimum wage law, some workers have difficulty finding jobs, and some firms end up paying more for labor than they otherwise would. A positive analysis of the federal minimum wage law uses an economic model to estimate how many workers have lost their jobs because of the law, its effect on the costs and profits of businesses, and the gains to workers receiving the minimum wage. After economists complete this positive analysis, the decision as to whether the minimum wage law is a good or a bad idea is a normative one and depends on how people evaluate the trade-off involved. Supporters of the law believe that the losses to employers and workers who are unemployed as a result of the law are more than offset by the gains to workers who receive higher wages than they would without the law. Opponents of the law believe the losses to be greater than the gains. The assessment by any individual depends, in part, on that person’s values and political views. The positive analysis an economist provides would play a role in the decision but can’t by itself decide the issue one way or the other.
In each chapter, you will see a Don’t Let This Happen to You box like the one below. These boxes alert you to common pitfalls in thinking about economic ideas.
﻿Don’t Let This Happen to You﻿
Don’t Confuse Positive Analysis with Normative Analysis
“Economic analysis has shown that the minimum wage law is a bad idea because it causes unemployment.” Is this statement accurate? In 2023, the federal minimum wage law prevented employers from hiring workers at a wage of less than $7.25 per hour. This wage is higher than some employers are willing to pay some workers. If there were no minimum wage law, some workers who currently cannot find any firm willing to hire them at $7.25 per hour would be able to find employment at a lower wage. Therefore, positive economic analysis indicates that the minimum wage law causes unemployment. (In Chapter 4, we’ll explore why economists disagree about how much unemployment the minimum wage law causes.) But some workers who have jobs benefit from the minimum wage law because they are paid a higher wage than they otherwise would be paid. In other words, the minimum wage law creates both losers—the workers who become unemployed and the firms that have to pay higher wages—and winners—the workers who receive higher wages.
Should we value the gains to the winners more than we value the losses to the losers? The answer involves normative analysis. Positive economic analysis can show the consequences of a particular policy, but it cannot tell us whether the policy is “good” or “bad.” So, the statement at the beginning of this box is inaccurate.


Because economics studies the actions of individuals, it is a social science, as are psychology, political science, and sociology. Economics differs from other social sciences in that it puts more emphasis on how the decisions of individuals explain outcomes such as the prices firms charge or the policies governments enact. Economics considers individual decision making in every context, not just in the context of business. Economists have studied issues such as why people have difficulty attaining goals such as losing weight, why people sometimes ignore relevant information when making decisions, and how couples decide to divide up household chores. Government policymakers have also increasingly relied on economic analysis when evaluating laws or regulations. As we will see throughout this book, economists have played an important role in influencing government policies in areas such as the environment, health care, and efforts to reduce poverty.

We saw in the chapter opener that during President Trump’s time in office, his administration tried to increase manufacturing employment by enacting tariffs on imported goods. President Biden continued many of these tariffs. What effect do tariffs on imports of goods from China and other countries have on the U.S. economy? Governments typically impose tariffs to raise revenue or to discourage imports by raising the selling prices of imported goods. If imports of goods decline, production and employment at domestic firms that compete with imports may increase. For example, a tariff on imports of furniture from China would raise the prices of imported furniture and lead U.S. consumers to buy more furniture manufactured in the United States. We can create a preliminary list of potential winners and losers in a country that imposes a tariff: The government gains from collecting the tariff revenue, and some domestic firms and their workers gain from the higher prices of competing imported goods. Consumers lose because they pay higher prices for goods on which the tariff has been enacted. If some of the imported goods are used as inputs or are sold by domestic firms—for example, Walmart may sell furniture imported from China—those firms will also lose from the tariff.
Economics can provide valuable information to policymakers and the general public as they consider actions such as implementing tariffs. As we will discuss further in Chapters 2 and 7, economic analysis shows that trade between countries occurs primarily on the basis of comparative advantage. A country has a comparative advantage if it can produce a good at a lower opportunity cost than competitors. For example, due to the climate and soil in Colombia, coffee can be grown there without requiring the transfer of significant resources from producing other goods and services—so the opportunity cost of producing coffee in Colombia is low. The United States is not well suited for producing coffee, so the opportunity cost of producing coffee in the United States is very high. We can conclude that Colombia has a comparative advantage relative to the United States in producing coffee. Imposing a high tariff on imports to the United States of Colombian coffee would reduce economic efficiency by shifting production of coffee from Colombia, where it can be grown at a low cost, to the United States, where it can only be grown at a high cost.

Economists can use models to estimate the dollar amounts gained by the winners from the imposition of a tariff, the amount lost by the losers, and the size of the loss of economic efficiency. Economic analysis of tariffs typically shows that the dollar losses from the government imposing a tariff are larger than the dollar gains, so the tariff causes a net loss for the country as a whole.
Although economic analysis can contribute to the debate over policy proposals by measuring their likely effects, it cannot by itself decide whether a proposal should be enacted. Policymakers and a majority of the general public may decide to support a tariff because they place a higher value on the gains to some groups—workers and firms struggling to compete against imported goods—than on the losses to other groups—consumers as a whole. In other words, policymakers and the general public would be making a normative judgment in favor of tariffs. Ultimately policymakers and the general public are responsible for weighing trade-offs and deciding whether a proposed policy should be enacted.