Week 9: Price and Production 
Instability 
In the market system, millions of individual people make millions of decisions each day about what to 
consume and what to produce in a vast global network of goods and services. Sometimes production will 
exceed demand, pushing up supply and driving down prices. Sometimes it is difficult for production to 
keep pace with demand, leading to shortages and higher prices. This process leads to another weakness 
of capitalism and the market system —price and production instability. This is also part of the business 
cycle, as growth in capitalism is inconsistent and variable.
There are several causes of price and production instability—the day-to-day decisions made by business 
managers, inaccurate decisions about trends in future markets, producing more goods and services than 
the current market requires, or reduced investment in future research and development and taking 
profits now rather than investing for the future. Other causes are related to consumer actions, for 
example a decline in overall demand, often related to a lack of consumer confidence or when wages do 
not keep pace with the production of goods and services. Workers do not have the income to purchase 
the production that exists, surpluses build up, and eventually production must decline to allow sales to 
catch up with inventory. The economy can also be affected by a national or world crisis such as war or 
natural disaster. America has the advantage that its economy and geography are so large that regional 
disasters seldom have an overwhelming impact. However, America is not an economic island, and 
disruptions in world markets can have monumental consequences on the American economy.
Too little production seems obviously bad for an economy—there are not enough goods and services 
needed in the economy, prices rise based on the principles of supply and demand, and inevitably some 
go without. Too much production can also be a negative in an economy. Although initially too much 
production should lead to lower prices and abundance for all, if it continues, producers will eventually cut 
back production, workers will be laid off, and without a pay check they will not be able to purchase goods 
and services, and more workers will be laid off. In the end, slower production and this downward spiral of 
productivity can lead to economic recession (a general slowdown in the economy) or even depression (a 
deeper more pronounced slowdown in the economy) where the economy shrinks, GDP (Gross Domestic 
Product) declines, and human misery increases.
Fiscal Policy & John Maynard Keynes
180

Production instability, and the accompanying economic downturns of recession and depression are 
serious problems in the market system. Economists have dedicated much of their time and energy 
seeking a solution to these problems and finding ways to manage these weaknesses and maximize 
benefits. Many of these economic policy solutions can be categorized as fiscal policy or monetary policy.
Fiscal policy can be defined as government spending used to stimulate production or government taxing 
used to smooth out the ups and downs in the economy. Fiscal policy is controlled by Congress through its 
power to tax and spend through legislation and by the 
president by introducing legislation or signing bills 
passed by Congress. It is important to note that 
government taxing and spending is only fiscal policy 
when it is used to manage the economy, not as a part 
of the normal operations of government. For example, 
if the government requisitions a purchase 10,000 
pencils for use by IRS employees, it is not practicing 
fiscal policy. If the government purchases 10,000 
pencils to stimulate production in the timber and 
mining industries, it is practicing fiscal policy.
Fiscal policy has been greatly influenced by the economic ideas of John Maynard Keynes. Keynes was a 
wealthy, educated, and brilliant Englishman born in 1883, the same year Karl Marx died. Even in his 
childhood he was fascinated by economic terms and ideas. He first worked for the British government in 
India, but resigned his unhappy post to work at the Treasury to help manage the empire’s overseas 
finances. He was present at the peace talks that ended World War I, and wrote a very successful book 
about the failure of those agreements. He made millions in the stock market by predicting its ups and 
downs, wrote The General Theory of Employment, Interest, & Money and gained a reputation as the 
greatest economist since Adam Smith.
Keynes theory is complex and technical, but can be easily understood in broad outlines. Keynesianism 
says that economic downturns result from insufficient demand— there are just not enough people 
buying stuff. Theoretically, supply and demand will meet at an equilibrium price that clears the market, 
but Keynes said that the equilibrium gets thrown off when suppliers produce too much, and decreasing 
prices do not necessarily encourage more consumption. There is oversupply without enough demand to 
meet all of that production. This means there are many “idle resources” in the economy— the productive 
assets not being used— and this inefficiency causes economic stagnation. In times of depression, prices 
may fall and consumers may still not have the ability to enter the marketplace, make purchases, and thus 
encourage more production, creating a dangerous downward spiral.
181

Keynes argued that in those times a government should use fiscal policy to increase demand and 
encourage production by reducing taxes and increasing spending to stimulate the economy. The first 
fiscal policy tool, the tax cut, reverses the problem of insufficient demand because, when taxes are lower, 
people have more money in their pockets to purchase the excess demand. The second fiscal policy tool, 
government spending, can reverse the problem of insufficient demand by having the government step in 
and pick up the slack. In Keynesian theory, insufficient private-sector demand is filled by public, 
government-sector demand and it really doesn’t matter what the government spends the money on: it 
can build museums, construct roads, or even hire people to dig holes and fill them back up again. People 
paid by the government to build a road can now buy consumer items, the makers of those items get paid 
and continue to support the economy with their wages, and so on. Government spending reverses the 
downward spiral.
Keynes’s argument was seen as radical at the time. Many even called it socialist, since the government 
(state) took responsibility for managing the economy. In actuality, the Keynesian theory sought to explain 
and overcome one of the inherent weaknesses of capitalism rather than use that weakness as an excuse 
to overturn the system as had Marx. Other critics took issue with that idea that by increasing spending 
and lowering taxes, Keynesian fiscal policy creates a budget deficit. However, Keynes argued that deficits 
were desirable and necessary during a recession to provide the capital to support the government 
stimulus, and deficit spending was not intended to be a long-term practice.
After the recession or depression ended and the economy recovered, governments would raise taxes and 
reduce spending in an effort to balance the budget. To those who countered that all of this government 
activity might have a negative effect on the economy in the long run, Keynes famously responded, “In the 
long run we are all dead.” In other words, we need to focus on the here and now— get demand back into 
alignment with supply and the rest will take care of itself.
Can governments effectively use taxing and spending as a way of managing the economy to avoid 
recessions and depressions? On the one hand, through the use of Keynesian fiscal policy, the American 
economy has been remarkably free from depressions since World War II. On the other hand, the fiscal 
policy programs of the New Deal during the Great Depression did not bring the Great Depression to an 
end.
Economists and historians continue to debate the relevance of Keynes’ arguments. Its advocates place 
Keynesianism at the middle ground between the extremes of socialism (complete government control of 
the economy) and laissez faire (no government control of the economy). It is free markets tempered by 
government action. There are pieces of Keynesianism that appeal to all sides of the political spectrum. 
Many conservatives point toward the tax cut piece of the stimulus, while many liberals support 
government spending to stimulate the economy. Therefore, it is not surprising that with this combination, 
182

debt and deficits have exploded since both low taxes and high government spending are politically 
popular. The battle for and against these policies rages and usually forms an important issue in every 
election cycle, and Keynes’s ideas continue to influence that debate.
Price Instability and Monetary Policy
As the production levels of goods and services vary, the prices and value of those goods and services vary 
as well creating price instability, another inherent weakness in the market system. This, in turn, can 
create inflation or deflation in the economy, changing the value of a nation’s currency. In order to 
understand these terms, we must outline the power of money in the economy and the ways in which its 
value is controlled.
Money performs three functions that are crucial to economic activity. First, it provides a medium of 
exchange rather than using a crude barter system. Second, it serves as a unit of account. This 
standardized unit of measurement improves our information and helps us make better economic 
decisions. The third and final function of money is to serve as a store of value. Most economic goods spoil 
over time, but money can hold its value indefinitely. The store of value function of money is important 
because capitalism requires saving, the deferred gratification of investment rather than immediate 
consumption. Capitalism rests on capital, and capital grows by saving and investing (through banks, 
stocks, bonds, etc.) rather than consuming resources. This pool of capital can then be used by 
entrepreneurs and businesses to start or expand productive enterprises.
Who creates, circulates, and regulates the supply and value of money in our economy? As the 
Constitution indicates in Article I, Section 8: “The Congress shall have power to… coin money and regulate 
the value thereof.” The government has a vital role in providing a medium of exchange and controlling 
the value of the money it creates.
This power was greatly expanded in 1913 when President Wilson created the Federal Reserve System 
(sometimes called “The Fed”), with the idea of giving the American people more control over the money 
supply through their representatives in government rather than it being controlled by private banks and 
interests. This new government agency was directly charged with “monetary policy,” which means 
increasing or decreasing the money supply as needed. The Fed can, through open market operations and 
manipulating interest rates, increase or decrease the amount of money “out there” in circulation. It can 
also regulate the money supply through the buying and selling of government securities.
Money, like everything else, is subject to the laws of supply and demand and even has a price. We call the 
price of money “the interest rate”— the amount you must pay to borrow money from a lender. When the 
Fed raises interest rates, banks also raise their rates, consumers borrow less money, and therefore the 
183

money supply contracts. When the Fed lowers interest rates, banks lower their rates, consumers borrow 
more money, economic activity grows, and the money supply expands. When interest rates are low and 
money is cheap, firms can more easily expand, individuals can more easily buy homes, and 
entrepreneurs can more easily start businesses. This is why The Fed engages in “quantitative easing” 
(increased money supply) when the economy is slow. A high money supply decreases the risk of bank 
failure. Remember, banks receive our money as deposits but only keep a portion of it on hand. They lend 
out the rest at interest and that is how they make a profit. This is not a problem unless too many 
depositors withdraw money at once— we call this a “bank run.” Since banks are a core institution in the 
economy, massive bank failure means failure of the whole system. If the money supply is high, then 
banks have access to more cash and can survive a bank run.
So why doesn't the Fed always foster a high money supply? The first is that a high money supply can 
create economic “bubbles.” When money is cheap, people often borrow heavily to purchase assets that 
increase in value only because of the buying frenzy itself, not because of the intrinsic value of the asset. 
It’s insubstantial and empty, hence the term “bubble.” When these bubbles pop (as they inevitably must—
it’s a natural market correction), prices come tumbling down, people lose millions, borrowers can’t pay off 
loans, and the economy contracts. This phenomenon was most recently seen during the 2008 global 
financial crisis, triggered by real estate speculation and excessive risk-taking by lenders.
Inflation and Deflation 
The creation of dangerous economic bubbles is not the only cost of a high money supply. Increasing the 
money supply will generally increase the rate of inflation. Inflation is defined as the general increase in 
prices and fall in the purchasing power of money.
Deflation is its opposite — the reduction of the general level of prices in an economy. Economists use 
indexes, the measuring of prices over time, to measure inflation and deflation. Examples of these indexes 
are the consumer price index and the wholesale price index. A consumer price index is a government 
survey of the price of goods typical consumers purchase regularly. Each month the total price of those 
goods is compared to the months before. If the price is going up, that is considered to be inflation. If the 
price is going down, that is considered to be deflation. The wholesale price index simply attempts to 
measure inflation or deflation before it reaches the consumer level.
The last noticeable period of deflation in the United States occurred during the Great Depression, the 
country’s worst example of what happens in a downward deflationary spiral. The value of money during a 
period of deflation actually increases because each dollar buys more. Although a situation where the cost 
of what people buy going down seems attractive, it is usually accompanied by a corresponding reduction 
184

in wages and salaries, increased unemployment, and reduced productivity in the economy. The last part 
of Lesson 9 describes the pain and suffering of the Great Depression and the dangers of deflation.
When inflation takes place there are those in the economy who are “winners” and those who are 
considered “losers” as the value of money goes down because each dollar actually buys less. The winners 
during inflation are those who borrow money, debtors, or those who own real estate. When money is 
borrowed to finance the purchase of a home in times of inflation, for example, the borrower is able to 
pay off the mortgage using dollars that are worth less and less as time goes on. When the home is finally 
paid for, inflation will have also made the value of the home go up, thus the debtor wins again. The 
government is considered a major winner during inflation as well, because the government is probably 
the greatest borrower in the economy. Personal incomes generally rise with inflation, thus the amount of 
taxes people pay goes up, and the government wins again.
The losers during a period of inflation are lenders, such as banks, who loan money. Lenders recognize 
and plan to protect themselves by charging sufficient interest to cover their losses, but in a highly 
unstable market this does not always work. Savers, or money holders, also lose money during inflation, 
as the interest rate paid to savers does not keep pace with inflation. Despite this possibility of loss, it is 
important to note that saving is still important. Without savings individuals cannot be prepared against 
economic “rainy days” nor can they take advantage of economic opportunities. At the same time without 
savings there would not be sufficient capital in the market to allow for new investment and growth.
Historically, most inflation in the United States occurred during periods of war because of fullemployment, increased wages, and a limited amount of consumer goods. America has for the most part 
avoided depressions and wild swings in inflation and deflation since the end of World War II and has 
enjoyed a relatively stable economy and a moderately growing inflation rate. As just one example, in 1970 
the average price of a gallon of gas was near fifty cents and the price of an average new car was around 
3500 dollars. Today the price of gas is closer to three dollars and the price of a new car closer to 30,000 
dollars. The difference between the two is what happens over a long period of inflation.
There are several reasons for this long period of inflation. First, people tend to prefer rising wages and 
profits to declining wages and profits and this makes it difficult to adjust to prices shifting downward. 
Second, environmental concerns and increased scarcity of some key resources has caused production 
costs to continue to rise. Third, there are automatic stabilizers built into the system, such as cost of living 
adjustments in entitlement and welfare programs, thus each increase in the economy triggers further 
increases in government payments. Fourth, the Federal Reserve’s aggressive use of monetary policy to 
stimulate and maintain economic growth increases the money supply which leads to inflation. And fifth, 
the increased use of fiscal policy to stimulate and maintain economic growth has led to increasing 
185

government spending. Before World War II there was little fiscal or monetary policy practiced by the 
national government, so that has been a dramatic change.
What are the dangers of inflation? Inflation means that since things generally cost more, your money 
buys less and has a lower value. This weakens the three functions of money —as a medium of exchange, 
its account function, and its store of value. People are less willing to accept inflated money in 
transactions. It’s difficult to use money as a measuring stick in transactions when the value of money is 
unstable and constantly changing. In other words, inflation exacerbates the already-serious market 
weakness of price instability. And finally, inflation spoils the value of money, making it worth less over 
time and making it difficult to store its value. This discourages the thrift and deferred gratification that 
leads to the saving and capital accumulation that makes capitalism succeed.
Though there are many good uses of monetary policy, there are also problems.
First, when using monetary policy to stimulate the economy to fight a recession, you may actually cause 
inflation and vice-a-versa. Second, because the Federal Reserve controls monetary policy when things are 
going good in the economy the Fed is praised. When things are going bad, the Fed becomes perceived as 
the cause and is accused of wielding too much power. There are also dangers in using fiscal policy. Using 
fiscal policy to fight recessions (cutting taxes) can be politically popular, but can lead to deficit spending. It 
is difficult to use fiscal policy to fight inflation (raising taxes). It is politically unpopular and too slow. Lastly, 
no matter what, the use of fiscal policy is always very political since it is controlled by the president and 
Congress.
Some may argue that the aggressive use of fiscal and monetary policy since the end of the Great 
Depression has maintained economic stability in America. Others argue that the use of fiscal and 
monetary policy has resulted in slower growth in the American economy and has artificially interfered 
with the natural operations of the laws of supply and demand. Recessions can result from inappropriate 
actions by the government—no action at all when it should have taken action, or an inappropriate use of 
fiscal or monetary policy when it does take action. Students should seek to understand these various 
points of view. With these issues surrounding price and political instability in mind, let’s now examine the 
social, economic, and political implications of the Great Depression.
The Great Depression
The Great Depression was the worst economic disaster in American history and the best example of the 
problems that can be created by the production and price instability of capitalism. Beginning in 1929, the 
Great Depression created business losses and personal suffering on a scale Americans had never 
experienced before. It has been called “The Invisible Scar,” a recognizable set of behaviors and fears that 
186

plague the generation that lived through the nearly decade long economic downturn. The depth of the 
depression led people to demand action and help from the government that came in the form of the New 
Deal. The legacy of the New Deal forever changed the nature of American politics and economics, and 
altered the general expectations of what a government should do to interfere in the actions of the free 
market.
Prior to the Great Depression there 
had been economic ups and downs, 
recessions and depressions –
considered normal parts of the 
business cycle in a free market 
economy. The Great Depression was 
multi-causal and interconnected, the 
result of decades of economic 
patterns with worldwide 
repercussions. In the 1920s, many 
economists predicted that the 
natural business cycle had been 
conquered, that American life meant 
unending growth, prosperity, and 
expansion. However, the general 
prosperity of the 1920s was distributed unevenly. Overproduction of goods after World War I, as 
businesses had geared up for the consumptive demand of a world at war, was met by under 
consumption, as worker’s wages did not keep pace with the rise in the price of goods and services that 
were being produced. Those who were buying were usually doing it by installment or by using credit. 
Family farms suffered as farm prices fell, and they faced European competition, high taxes, and long term 
debt. Problems loomed throughout the 1920s, but the trigger event came with the Stock Market Crash of 
1929. Rampant and unregulated speculation on the stock market financed by borrowed money inflated 
stock prices artificially. Pyramid schemes, unwise investments, and no laws or limits placed on banks who 
invested speculatively meant that in October 1929, prices crashed, erasing 11 billion dollars of wealth 
within the week. Banks failed, businesses cut production, unemployment rose to almost one-quarter of 
all Americans, people stopped buying goods, creating a gradual spiral downward, a free-fall that seemed 
to have no bottom. Because of the interconnections of the world economy, the Great Depression was a 
global phenomenon, as many countries faced similar disasters (Germany and Japan were among those 
countries hardest hit). Between 1929 and 1933 when President Roosevelt took over from President 
Hoover, nearly every aspect of the economy worsened.
187

President Hoover did try to manage some of 
the effects of the Great Depression and put 
government programs in place. He initiated 
federal construction projects (like the Hoover 
Dam) and tried to offer federal assistance to 
banks and insurance companies to help them 
avoid bankruptcy. These efforts did not pump 
enough capital into the system as Keynes had 
suggested to get the economy going again. In 
addition, most of the federal action came in 
behalf of banks, insurance companies, and 
construction companies, and people accused 
Hoover of being more interested in helping 
banks than in helping people. The most 
notorious misstep by Hoover was his handling of the “Bonus Army” protest.
The Bonus Army was made up of World War I veterans who wanted an advance on their bonus checks 
promised to them for redemption in 1945 to help with their current situation. Groups began to march to 
Washington, D.C., and grew into the thousands, including wives and children. They protested on the steps 
of the capitol and then moved to a nearby park where they set up a tent city to continue their pressure 
on Congress to act. Hoover refused to support the marchers, and asked General Douglas MacArthur to 
remove the protesters. Using soldiers and armed vehicles, the men, women, and children were driven out 
and their tent city burned to the ground. Hoover was blamed, and this incident was used to bolster the 
claim that he had no desire to help suffering people.
In this excerpt of FDR’s First Inaugural Address from 1933, the environment into which the new president 
came into power is evident. Note the hopeful tone combined with the growing sense that a government 
must intervene to combat the economic calamity. He appeals to the Constitution and the long-history of 
American struggle through difficult times.
1933 – FDR – First Inaugural Address
This is preeminently the time to speak the truth, the whole truth, frankly and boldly. Nor need we shrink 
from honestly facing conditions in our country today. This great Nation will endure, as it has endured, 
will revive and will prosper.
So, first of all, let me assert my firm belief that the only thing we have to fear is fear itself -- nameless, 
unreasoning, unjustified terror which paralyzes needed efforts to convert retreat into advance. In such a 
188

spirit on my part and on yours we face our common difficulties. They concern, thank God, only material 
things. Values have shrunk to fantastic levels; taxes have risen; our ability to pay has fallen; government 
of all kinds is faced by serious curtailment of income; the means of exchange are frozen in the currents 
of trade; the withered leaves of industrial enterprise lie on every side; farmers find no markets for their 
produce; and the savings of many years in thousands of families are gone. More important, a host of 
unemployed citizens face the grim problem of existence, and an equally great number toil with little 
return. Only a foolish optimist can deny the dark realities of the moment...
Our greatest primary task is to put people to work. This is no 
unsolvable problem if we face it wisely and courageously. It can be 
accomplished in part by direct recruiting by the Government itself, 
treating the task as we would treat the emergency of a war, but at the 
same time, through this employment, accomplishing great—greatly 
needed projects to stimulate and reorganize the use of our great 
natural resources....
And finally, in our progress towards a resumption of work, we require 
two safeguards against a return of the evils of the old order. There 
must be a strict supervision of all banking and credits and 
investments. There must be an end to speculation with other people's 
money. And there must be provision for an adequate but sound 
currency....
Action in this image, action to this end is feasible under the form of 
government which we have inherited from our ancestors. Our Constitution is so simple, so practical that 
it is possible always to meet extraordinary needs by changes in emphasis and arrangement without loss 
of essential form. That is why our constitutional system has proved itself the most superbly enduring 
political mechanism the modern world has ever seen.
It has met every stress of vast expansion of territory, of foreign wars, of bitter internal strife, of world 
relations. And it is to be hoped that the normal balance of executive and legislative authority maybe 
wholly equal, wholly adequate to meet the unprecedented task before us. But it may be that an 
unprecedented demand and need for un-delayed action may call for temporary departure from that 
189

normal balance of public procedure. I am prepared under my 
constitutional duty to recommend the measures that stricken nation in 
the midst of a stricken world may require.
These measures, or such other measures as the Congress may build out 
of its experience and wisdom, I shall seek, within my constitutional 
authority, to bring to speedy adoption. But, in the event that the Congress 
shall fail to take one of these two courses, in the event that the national 
emergency is still critical, I shall not evade the clear course of duty that 
will then confront me. I shall ask the Congress for the one remaining 
instrument to meet the crisis -- broad Executive power to wage a war 
against the emergency, as great as the power that would be given to me if 
we were in fact invaded by a foreign foe. We do not distrust the future 
of essential democracy. The people of the United States have not failed. In 
their need they have registered a mandate that they want direct, vigorous 
action. They have asked for discipline and direction under leadership. They have made me the present 
instrument of their wishes. In the spirit of the gift I take it.
In this dedication -- In this dedication of a Nation, we humbly ask the blessing of God. May He protect 
each and every one of us. May He guide me in the days to come.
In 1933, Roosevelt began implementing the programs he called the “New Deal” during his campaign. The 
program was based on Keynesian principles of government spending, and had many facets to provide 
relief, recovery, and reform. In a whirlwind first 100 days of his presidency, he passed an “alphabet soup” 
of reform minded programs through Congress to deal with the dire situation of the American economy. 
The Federal Emergency Relief Act (FERA) pumped $500 million dollars in to state-run relief programs for 
immediate relief. The Emergency Banking Relief Act permitted solvent banks to reopen under 
government supervision, and later created the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) to restore 
trust in banks and guarantee deposits. The Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC), Public Works 
Administration (PWA) and Works Progress Administration (WPA) helped provide jobs and a basic level of 
income to get the economy going. The government encouraged the creation of jobs in the private sector 
and protected the rights of unions to organize in worker’s interests with the National Industrial Recovery 
190

Act (NIRA) and the Wagner Act. The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) was tasked with regulating 
the financial market excesses that had led to the stock market crash. 
With the Social Security Administration (SSA), the government took on the responsibility for the economic 
well-being of its senior members, a group often susceptible to economic crises. To help farmers and 
regulate commodities prices, the Agricultural 
Adjustment Act (AAA) partnered the 
government and major producers to help raise 
prices. To bolster support for these programs, 
Roosevelt gave radio speeches, called “Fireside 
Chats,” which communicated directly the goals 
of his administration to the American people.
There were some voices at the time who 
believed Franklin Roosevelt and the New Deal 
were contrary to American ideals, and anticapitalistic, as well as an infringement on 
individual liberty. Opposing forces in Congress 
challenged the reach of his power, and several 
of the New Deal programs were eventually 
found unconstitutional. Other critics of the New 
Deal thought that Roosevelt’s programs did not go far enough to combat the ills of capitalism. One such 
radical voice was Huey Long, a senator from Louisiana and an advocate for what he called “Share the 
Wealth.” His slogan was “None too big, none too little, but every man a king,” and the program’s main 
feature was to guarantee each family a minimum income by increasing the tax rate on the wealthy. 
Notice how his proposals go beyond the scope of the New Deal to guarantee a larger safety net. The 
appeal of Long and other more radical voices demonstrated the continued suffering and difficulties 
experienced during the Great Depression.
Senator Huey P. Long, SHARE THE WEALTH (Radio Speech, 1934)
I contend, my friends, that we have no difficult problem to solve in America, and that is the view of 
nearly everyone with whom I have discussed the matter here in Washington and elsewhere throughout 
the United States—that we have no very difficult problem to solve. It is not the difficulty of the problem 
which we have; it is the fact that the rich people of this country—and by rich people I mean the superrich—will not allow us to solve the problems, or rather the one little problem that is afflicting this 
191

country, because in order to cure all of our woes it is necessary to scale down the big fortunes, that we 
may scatter the wealth to be shared by all of the people…
How many of you remember the first thing that the Declaration of Independence said? It said:
"We hold these truths to be self-evident, that there are certain inalienable rights for the people, and 
among them are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness;" and it said further, "We hold the view that 
all men are created equal." Now, what did they mean by that? Did they mean, my friends, to say that all 
men are created equal and that that meant that any one man was born to inherit
$10,000,000,000 and that another child was to be born to inherit nothing?…
Now, my friends, if you were off on an island where there were 100 lunches, you could not let one man 
eat up the hundred lunches, or take the hundred lunches and not let anybody else eat any of them. If 
you did, there would not be anything else for the balance of the people to consume. So, we have in 
America today, my friends, a condition by which about 10 men dominate the means of activity in at 
least 85 percent of the activities that you own. They either own directly everything or they have got some 
kind of mortgage on it, with a very small percentage to be excepted. They own the banks, they own the 
steel mills, they own the railroads, they own the bonds, they own the mortgages, they own the stores, 
and they have chained the country from one end to the other until there is not any kind of business that 
a small, independent man could go into today and make a living, and there is not any kind of business 
that an independent man can go into and make any money to buy an automobile with; and they have 
finally and gradually and steadily eliminated everybody from the fields in which there is a living to be 
made, and still they have got little enough sense to think they ought to be able to get more business out 
of it anyway.…
Now, we have organized a society, and we call it "Share Our Wealth Society," a society with the motto 
"Every Man a King.” Every man a king, so there would be no such thing as a man or woman who did not 
have the necessities of life, who would not be dependent upon the whims and caprices and ipsi dixit of 
the financial barons for a living. What do we propose by this society? We propose to limit the wealth of 
big men in the country. There is an average of $15,000 in wealth to every family in America. That is right 
here today.
We do not propose to divide it up equally. We do not propose a division of wealth, but we propose to 
limit poverty that we will allow to be inflicted upon any man's family. We will not say we are going to try 
to guarantee any equality, or
$15,000 to a family. No; but we do say that one third of the average is low enough for any one family to 
hold, that there should be a guarantee of a family wealth of around $5,000; enough for a home, an 
automobile, a radio, and the ordinary conveniences, and the opportunity to educate their children; a 
192

fair share of the income of this land thereafter to that family so there will be no such thing as merely the 
select to have those things, and so there will be no such thing as a family living in poverty and distress.
We have to limit fortunes. Our present plan is that we will allow no one man to own more that 
$50,000,000. … Those are the things we propose to do. "Every Man a King." Every man to eat when there 
is something to eat; all to wear something when there is something to wear. That makes us all a 
sovereign.
You cannot solve these things through these various and sundry alphabetical codes. You can have the N. 
R. A. and P. W. A. and C. W. A. and the U. U. G. and G. I. N. and any other kind of dad-gummed lettered 
code. You can wait until doomsday and see 25 more alphabets, but that is not going to solve this 
proposition. Why hide? Why quibble? You know what the trouble is. The man that says he does not know 
what the trouble is just hiding his face to keep from seeing the sunlight. God told you what the trouble 
was. The philosophers told you what the trouble was; and when you have a country where one man 
owns more than 100,000 people, or a million people, and when you have 
a country where there are four men, as in America, that have got more 
control over things than all the 120,000,000 people together, you know 
what the trouble is.
The New Deal did not bring the Great Depression to an end. Only the 
massive public sector spending of World War II eventually brought the 
economy back onto stable footing. However, Roosevelt did stop the 
economic free-fall of the American economy, and help avoid the 
economic and political instability that plagued other nations of the 
world in this same time period.
The New Deal does provide several economic legacies, however, that 
continue to influence government response to economic challenges 
down to today. First, as a result of the New Deal people came to accept the government’s role as 
problem solver, economic stimulator, and economic regulator. Government became responsible 
to intervene in the interest of economic justice and to provide an economic safety net to protect 
people from economic disaster. These ideas were outlined in what FDR called his “Economic Bill of 
Rights” (see below). Second, the New Deal strengthened the notion of big government as positive 
good, as new agencies were created to administer and oversee programs, and more people came 
to be employed by the federal government. Third, the New Deal shaped the future of both the 
Democratic and Republican parties. Henceforth, the Democrats would be seen as the party 
committed to finding government solutions to economic problems within capitalism, and the 
Republicans became more identified with private sector economics. However each party now 
193

operates in the new political environment created by the New Deal, in which the government has 
a role to play in maintaining and protecting economic responsibility and opportunity. Fourth, the 
New Deal helped maintain faith in American democracy and capitalism. Many were convinced that 
the Great Depression demonstrated the failure of capitalism in America.
Thousands joined the communist party and other radical movements. New Deal government 
programs were always meant to save the free market, and in the moderate political conditions of 
the time were able to keep in place the fundamentals of capitalism. Other nations, like Germany 
and Japan, took more radical economic and political steps to deal with the effects of the worldwide 
depression, making the United States almost conservative in comparison.
Since the New Deal, historians have differed in their interpretations of both the causes of the 
Great Depression and the effectiveness of the New Deal in combating its problems. Some voices 
see the New Deal as a necessary evolution of economic actions by government to save the 
American people in an increasingly complex and worldwide economy. Some have argued that the 
New Deal didn’t go far enough in its reach, leading to a Depression that lasted more than a decade 
and did not solve the problems of inequality and poverty. Others have questioned whether these 
New Deal programs unwittingly lengthened the suffering caused by the Great Depression by 
interfering in the free market in ways that were counter-productive and damaging.
One such voice is economist Lawrence W. Reed of the Mackinac Center for Public Policy. His 
pamphlet, “Great Myths of the Great Depression,” has been reprinted widely since its appearance 
in 1981. His main argument is that the common explanation for the Great Depression, that it was 
caused by free-market capitalism, is flawed. He rejects the Keynesian economic model. He 
contends that poor government policy not only helped cause the Great Depression, but actions 
taken afterward lengthened and deepened the economic catastrophe.
Great Myths of the Great 
Depression - Lawrence W. 
Reed
Many volumes have been written about the Great 
Depression and its impact on the lives of millions of 
Americans. Historians, economists, and politicians 
have all combed the wreckage searching for the “black 
box” that will reveal the cause of this legendary 
tragedy. Sadly, all too many of them decide to 
194

abandon their search, finding it easier perhaps to circulate a host of false and harmful conclusions 
about the events of seven decades ago.
How bad was the Great Depression? Over the four years from 1929 to 1933, production at the nation’s 
factories, mines, and utilities fell by more than half.
People’s real disposable incomes dropped 28 percent. Stock prices collapsed to one-tenth of their precrash height. The number of unemployed Americans rose from 1.6 million in 1929 to 12.8 million in 
1933. One of every four workers was out of a job at the Depression’s nadir, and ugly rumors of revolt 
simmered for the first time since the Civil War. Old myths never die; they just keep showing up in college 
economics and political science textbooks. Students today are frequently taught that unfettered free 
enterprise collapsed of its own weight in 1929, paving the way for a decade-long economic depression 
full of hardship and misery. President Herbert Hoover is presented as an advocate of “hands-off,” or 
laissez-faire, economic policy, while his successor, Franklin Roosevelt, is the economic savior whose 
policies brought us recovery. This popular account of the Depression belongs in a book of fairy tales and 
not in a serious discussion of economic history, as a review of the facts demonstrates.
On the eve of America’s entry into World War II and twelve years after the stock market crash of Black 
Thursday, ten million Americans were jobless. Roosevelt had pledged in 1932 to end the crisis, but it 
persisted two presidential terms and countless interventions later. Along with the horror of World War II 
came a revival of trade with America’s allies.
The war’s destruction of people and resources did not help the U.S. economy, but this renewed trade 
did. More importantly, the Truman administration that followed Roosevelt was decidedly less eager to 
berate and bludgeon private investors, and as a result, those investors came back into the economy to 
fuel a powerful postwar boom.
195

The genesis of the Great Depression lay in the inflationary monetary policies of the U.S. government in 
the 1920s. It was prolonged and exacerbated by a litany of political missteps: trade-crushing tariffs, 
incentive- sapping taxes, mind-numbing controls on production and competition, senseless destruction 
of crops and cattle, and coercive labor laws, to recount just a few. It was not the free market that 
produced twelve years of agony; rather, it was political bungling on a scale as grand as there ever was.
The debates continue, but there is no argument about the far-reaching impact of the Great 
Depression and New Deal on economic policy and political culture in the United States. In 1944, in 
his State of the Union address to Congress, with
World War II raging, Roosevelt outlined his plans for the future. In this document, you can see the 
influence of New Deal programs on the political conversation, with echoes that are still heard 
today.
The Economic Bill of Rights - Franklin D. Roosevelt (1944)
It is our duty now to begin to lay the plans and determine the strategy for the winning of a lasting peace 
and the establishment of an American standard of living higher than ever before known. We cannot be 
content, no matter how high that general standard of living may be, if some fraction of our people —
whether it be one- third or one-fifth or one-tenth — is ill-fed, ill-clothed, ill-housed, and insecure.
This Republic had its beginning, and grew to its present strength, under the protection of certain 
inalienable political rights — among them the right of free speech, free press, free worship, trial by jury, 
freedom from unreasonable searches and seizures. They were our rights to life and liberty. As our 
nation has grown in size and stature, however — as our industrial economy expanded — these political 
rights proved inadequate to assure us equality in the pursuit of happiness.
We have come to a clear realization of the fact that true individual freedom cannot exist without 
economic security and independence. "Necessitous men are not free men." People who are hungry and 
out of a job are the stuff of which dictatorships are made. In our day these economic truths have 
become accepted as self-evident. We have accepted, so to speak, a second Bill of Rights under which a 
new basis of security and prosperity can be established for all — regardless of station, race, or creed. 
Among these are:
● The right to a useful and remunerative job in the industries or shops or farms or mines of the 
nation;
● The right to earn enough to provide adequate food and clothing and recreation;
● The right of every farmer to raise and sell his products at a return which will give him and his 
family a decent living;
196

● The right of every businessman, large and small, to trade in an atmosphere of freedom from 
unfair competition and domination by monopolies at home or abroad;
● The right of every family to a decent home;
● The right to adequate medical care and the opportunity to achieve and enjoy good health;
● The right to adequate protection from the economic fears of old age, sickness, accident, and 
unemployment;
● The right to a good education.
All of these rights spell security. And after this war is won we must be prepared to move forward, in the 
implementation of these rights, to new goals of human happiness and well-being. America's own rightful 
place in the world depends in large part upon how fully these and similar rights have been carried into
practice for our citizens