Week 10: Inclusion and Exclusion
The issue of “exclusion” is a complex one. Over the history of the United States, certain groups have been 
excluded from full participation in the American experience. The reasons for this exclusion can be 
grouped into two categories: individual action that results in the removal of certain privileges, and a belief 
by the majority in society that certain groups are unfit or unworthy to be full participants in American 
society. The first category falls under the laws, rules, and regulations established by a society, the 
willingness of some people to violate those regulations, and the punishments that result. As the 
Constitution determines, that punishment cannot be “cruel and unusual” and must be tied to the courts, 
as well as state and federal governments to determine appropriate levels of punishment.
The second category, the unjust exclusion of groups by the larger society is the focus of this lesson. A 
tyrannical majority that will exclude and mistreat its minorities is one of the problems of a republican 
government. Not all groups are given equal access to the political system. This is not a problem unique to 
the United States to exclude certain groups or individuals based on outward characteristics. It seems a 
part of the natural man to understand societal relationships in terms of separation, of “us” and “them.” 
Human beings take note of differences in race, religion, politics and other factors and create out of fear, 
pride, or economic competition hierarchies and divisions. This tendency creates a spirit of pride, enmity, 
and competitiveness. Although these practices are a part of human nature, they are most certainly the 
natural side of man rather than coming from the spiritual side, and they are not part of the gospel of 
Jesus Christ. As the Savior said, “If ye are not one, ye are not mine,” and “Behold, this is not my doctrine to 
stir up the hearts of men with anger, one against another,; but this is my doctrine, that such things should 
be done away.”
As part of trying to recognize and overcome this spirit, we will examine various examples in United States 
history of prejudice, racism, discrimination, bigotry, and nativism. Through a short overview of the Civil 
Rights Movement, we will examine the struggle against long-held prejudice and discrimination through 
non-violent protest movements, action by the executive branch, and Supreme Court decisions in bringing 
about full legal equality for African Americans and by extension other groups. We will look at the history 
of immigration, and the different waves that have traveled to the United States and the degrees to which 
they have been accepted by the larger society because of race, culture, and perceived economic 
competition. We will also look at Japanese internment, an example where fear and anger replaced 
constitutional principles in a time of war and national security concerns.
198

Definitions
Before exploring in brief the history of racism, discrimination, bigotry, and nativism in the United States, 
we must define our terms.
Race: An inherited set of characteristics that make it possible to distinguish one person or group 
of persons from another. Today these are considered to be primarily physical or genetic traits, 
although many argue race is more of a societal construct than pure genetic differences would 
imply. These identified and presumed “differences” commonly formed the basis for negative 
stereotypes and often violent discrimination.
Culture: A learned set of expressions and values. It can include everything from language to 
religion, to a society’s ideas about marriage, responsibility, family, employment, art, and music. 
Culture has more to do with how one is raised than where they were born (nature vs. nurture).
Ethnicity: An expression of chosen characteristics. These could be cultural characteristics that a 
person chooses to retain when entering a new culture, or a recapturing of traditions from one’s 
family ancestral background. The expression of ethnicity often comes through cultural 
characteristics like language, religion, marriage practice, employment, art, and music.
Melting Pot/Pluralism: These are words used to describe how immigrants to America have been 
assimilated into the dominant culture. Melting pot implies complete assimilation, and was seen as 
desirable to those looking at immigration in the 1800s who were afraid of continued ties of culture 
and ethnicity among those groups seen as too different to fully become “Americans.” Pluralism is a 
more modern view of the cultural and ethnic diversity that is the American cultural experience, 
and a celebration of continuing cultural, ethnic, and racial differences that make the country 
strong and vibrant.
Racism: A negative expression of discrimination, prejudice, and bigotry based solely on race, 
deeply engrained in a culture. Examples of racism in United States history include Native American 
extermination and the reservation system, African American slavery, the continued segregation of 
African Americans in the South by law and in the North and West by tradition after the end of 
slavery, anti-Irish sentiment during the great immigration of the 1840s, anti-Jewish and Eastern 
European attitudes during the immigration of the 1880s and 1890s, and the internment of 
Japanese Americans during World War II. 
Bigotry: A belief that holds blindly and intolerantly to the idea that your culture or race is superior 
to any other. There are again many examples of this in American history, but some of the more 
199

prominent examples are the treatment of African slaves and justification for the practice, the Ku 
Klux Klan using violence and intimidation against newly freed slaves after the Civil War, and how 
some react to the newest waves of immigration in the United States today.
Nativism: A fear of foreign influence and a belief that encroaching “others” threaten the power 
and hold of the dominant culture and its institutions. Examples range from treatment of 
immigrants from Southern and Eastern Europe in the 1880s who were primarily Catholic and Jews 
to nativist movements today.
Segregation: The established price of separating races in an official way by law (de jure) in the 
American South and by practice (de facto) in the North and West, which reigned from the 1880s to 
the 1960s, and still continues some patterns today. Segregation created a social system in which 
African Americans and other minority races were prevented from mingling with whites in society. 
This included separate entrances to businesses, seats on buses, libraries, churches, drinking 
fountains, restrooms, swimming pools, and particularly schools. The system was found to be 
constitutional in the Supreme Court decision in 1896, Plessy v. Ferguson, and remained the 
practice for nearly 100 years. The legacy of these separations continues to plague the United 
States today in a myriad of ways. 
The Civil Rights Movement
The roots of discrimination against African Americans runs deep in the American story. The first African 
slaves were brought over in 1619, and the practice, unknown in Europe, gradually evolved in the colonies, 
and was practiced throughout the entire region, not only in the South. The labor practice was a sticking 
point in debates over the Declaration of Independence, as one of the wrongs blamed on King George was 
that he had “waged cruel war against human nature itself, violating its most sacred rights of life and 
liberty in the persons of a distant people who never offended him, captivating & carrying them into 
slavery in another hemisphere or to incur miserable death in their transportation thither.” At the 
insistence of the Southern colonies, the passage was stricken. 
The controversy continued with the drafting of the Constitution, as various compromises surrounding 
representation and the limitation on the foreign slave trade were debated (the internal slave trade was 
still allowed). And as the country continued its movement west, the delicate balance of power between 
North and South was continually debated as new territories and states had to be admitted based on their 
slavery status. One of the most famous apologists for the practice of slavery was George Fitzhugh, who in 
1854 published his tract “Sociology for the South, or the Failure of Society.” He argued against the 
growing anti-slavery sentiment in the North, and the small minority of abolitionists who were arguing for 
equality and immediate abolition. He maintained that the South’s labor system was not only good for 
200

African slaves, who were saved from the horrors of Africa, but was more humane than a free labor 
capitalist system that exploited its workers in the North.
George Fitzhugh - Sociology for the South - 1854
We would remind those who deprecate and sympathize with negro slavery, that his slavery here relieves 
him from a far more cruel slavery in Africa, or from idolatry and cannibalism, and every brutal vice and 
crime that can disgrace humanity; and that it christianizes, protects, supports and civilizes him; that it 
governs him far better than free laborers at the North are governed… Our negroes are not only better 
off as to physical comfort than free laborers, but their moral condition is better….
Would the abolitionists approve of a system of society that set white children free, and remitted them at 
the age of fourteen, males and females, to all the rights, both as to person and property, which belong 
to adults? Would it be criminal or praiseworthy to do so? Criminal, of course. Now, are the average of 
negroes equal in information, in native intelligence, in prudence or providence, to well-informed white 
children of fourteen? We who have lived with them for forty years, think not. The competition of the 
world would be too much for the children. They would be cheated out of their property and debased in 
their morals. Yet they would meet everywhere with sympathizing friends of their own color, ready to aid, 
advise and assist them. The negro would be exposed to the same competition and greater temptations, 
with no greater ability to contend with them, with these additional difficulties. He would be welcome 
nowhere; meet with thousands of enemies and no friends. If he went North, the white laborers would 
kick him and cuff him, and drive him out of employment. If he went to Africa, the savages would cook 
him and eat him. If he went to the West Indies, they would not let him in, or if they did, they would soon 
make of him a savage and idolater.
The Civil War ended slavery, but did not end the racial attitudes that had allowed it to exist for 200 years. 
In the tragic era of Reconstruction, there were brief gains for newly freed slaves and a move towards 
federal protection with the passage of the 13th (ending slavery), 14th (defining citizenship), and 15th 
(right to vote despite “previous condition of servitude”) amendments. There was some discussion of 
breaking up plantations, and giving those who had worked the land “40 acres and a mule.” However, 
there was a gradual deterioration of constitutional protections that had been passed and a lack of federal 
oversight or enforcement. Southern states adopted Black Codes, laws designed to keep freed slaves in a 
lower social, political, and economic status than whites, and tied them to the land with the system of 
sharecropping that approximated the experience of slavery. As time went on, Jim Crow laws legalized 
discrimination with rules designed to separate the races completely and ensure social control. Voting 
practices - poll taxes, literacy tests, and other tricks and games were put into place that made it difficult 
for African Americans to register to vote.
201

The brief gains in the Reconstruction period were gone, and Northern political power lost interest in 
remaking Southern society. And those who attempted to circumvent the new order, either with protest or 
exercising the right to vote, were met with quick and often violent oppression. The Ku Klux Klan, the 
ghosts of the confederacy, used brutal means to intimidate those who would fight the system. Lynching 
was the most dramatic and violent of their actions, and these extra-legal mob killings were not rare 
occurrences. Between 1901-1910 there were 846 cases of lynching, murders of anyone seen as stepping 
outside the racial boundaries that had been set. And the Supreme Court in 1896 gave constitutional 
protection to segregation in its decision Plessy v. Ferguson, a case that had begun as a challenge to the 
train seating rules in Louisiana. It put into the law the idea that “separate but equal” was allowed under 
the constitution, and gave the federal stamp of approval for the system of segregation in the South.
Plessy v. Ferguson Supreme Court Decision, 1896
The object of the [Fourteenth] Amendment was undoubtedly to enforce the absolute equality of the two 
races before the law, but in the nature of things it could not have been intended to abolish distinctions 
based upon color, or to enforce social, as distinguished from political, equality, or a commingling of the 
two races upon terms unsatisfactory to either…We consider the underlying fallacy of the plaintiff’s 
argument to consist in the assumption that the enforced separation of the two races stamps the colored 
race with a badge of inferiority. If this be so, it is not by reason of anything found in the act, but solely 
because the colored race chooses to put that construction upon it…The argument also assumes that 
social prejudices may be overcome by legislation, and that equal rights cannot be secured to the Negro 
except by and enforced commingling of the two races. We cannot accept this proposition. If the two 
races are to meet upon terms of social equality, it must be the result of natural affinities, a mutual 
appreciation of each other’s merits and a voluntary consent of individuals…
Despite this toxic and difficult environment of systematic oppression, there were some attempts to 
combat entrenched racial discrimination despite having lost every battle since Reconstruction. In 
1909 the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) was created. There 
was significant migration of African Americans from the Deep South to the factories in the north and 
midwest in the early part of the 1900s, and again during World War II to the north and west. African 
Americans went from being the most rural Americans to the most urban in this period. Although 
Northern racism was also powerful and limiting, more economic opportunity allowed communities to 
develop that would provide a real strength and influence to the Civil Rights Movement in the 1960s. 
There was a gradual realization that the movement would need the federal government to be its ally. 
Those who could vote in the North became a key part of Franklin Roosevelt’s New Deal Coalition, and 
began to make gains within Washington.
202

After World War II, many factors came into play that would help the Civil Rights Movement become a 
national force for change. Servicemen returning from the war began to question America’s professed 
commitment to democracy as they came home to discrimination. World War II dramatized the glaring 
contradiction between the American ideal of equal rights and the reality of racial inequality. By 1945, 
roughly 1/3 of the African American population lived outside the south. Having found both the 
legislative and executive branches somewhat indifferent to racial discrimination, activists began to 
pursue their only remaining branch of government - the courts.
Court challenges began to 
work their way through the 
system, particularly in the 
areas of school access. Their 
direct focus was the Plessy v. 
Ferguson decision that had 
made separate schools legal. 
Schools were separate but 
never equal in the 17 states 
that had segregated school 
systems. The case that made 
its way all the way to the 
Supreme Court in 1954 
involved a little girl named Linda Brown, a third grader who had to walk to a bus to get to school 
although she lived only a few blocks away from an all-white school. Her parents, and others, filed 
suit. The cases were brought together under the name Brown v. Board of Education, and was 
argued by lawyers working for the NAACP. They were able to bring forth evidence of the school’s 
inequality, and the damaging effect that segregation had on the esteem and education of these 
children. The unanimous decision ruled that segregated schools were inherently unequal and 
unconstitutional, overturning Plessy v. Ferguson.
Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas (1954)
In each of the cases, minors of the Negro race, through their legal representatives, seek the aid of the 
courts in obtaining admission to the public schools of their community on a nonsegregated basis. In 
each instance, they had been denied admission to schools attended by white children under laws 
requiring or permitting segregation according to race. This segregation was alleged to deprive the 
plaintiffs of the equal protection of the laws under the Fourteenth Amendment….
203

In approaching this problem, we cannot turn the clock back to 1868 when the Amendment was adopted, 
or even to 1896 when Plessy v. Ferguson was written. We must consider public education in the light of 
its full development and its present place in American life throughout the Nation. Only in this way can it 
be determined if segregation in public schools deprives these plaintiffs of the equal protection of the 
laws. Today, education is perhaps the most important function of state and local governments. 
Compulsory school attendance laws and the great expenditures for education both demonstrate our 
recognition of the importance of education to our democratic society. It is required in the performance 
of our most basic public responsibilities, even service in the armed forces. It is the very foundation of 
good citizenship. Today it is a principal instrument in awakening the child to cultural values, in 
preparing him for later professional training, and in helping him to adjust normally to his environment. 
In these days, it is doubtful that any child may reasonably be expected to succeed in life if he is denied 
the opportunity of an education. Such an opportunity, where the state has undertaken to provide it, is a 
right which must be made available to all on equal terms. We come then to the question presented: 
does segregation of children in public schools solely on the basis of race, even though the physical 
facilities and other "tangible" factors may be equal, deprive the children of the minority group of equal 
educational opportunities? We believe that it does…
We conclude that, in the field of public education, the doctrine of "separate but equal" has no place. 
Separate educational facilities are inherently unequal. Therefore, we hold that the plaintiffs and others 
similarly situated for whom the actions have been brought are, by reason of the segregation complained 
of, deprived of the equal protection of the laws guaranteed by the Fourteenth Amendment.
With this momentous decision, hopes rose that the system of segregation would quickly fall, and that the 
school victory would lead to more victories over segregation. It did not. Some school districts complied 
immediately, but most found ways to subvert the court order, by closing their school districts, opening up 
“private” schools, or delaying implementation of desegregation. White Citizen Councils organized 
throughout the South. President Eisenhower did not pledge the power of the federal government to 
enforce the law, saying “I don't believe you can change the hearts of men with law.” In reaction to the 
Brown v. Board of Education decision, over a hundred United States Congressmen from the former 
Confederate States signed a "Southern Manifesto," pledging to fight the Supreme Court's decision at 
every turn, and to use “all lawful means to bring about a reversal of this decision which is contrary to the 
Constitution…It is destroying the amicable relations between the white and Negro races that have been 
created through ninety years of patient effort by the good people of both races. It has planted hatred and 
suspicion where there has been heretofore friendship and understanding.” Many saw it as a threat to 
states rights, as one letter to Time magazine explained, ““Believe it or not, the South is part of the US, and 
is entitled to majority rule. If the majority of a state wants segregated schools, they should have them…to 
integrate the schools against the will of the vast majority is a crime against democracy.” There were some 
204

victories. In 1957, nine black students had registered to attend a high school of 2000 whites in Little Rock, 
Arkansas. The governor blocked their entry to the school with the national guard. In a test case of state 
vs. federal power, President Eisenhower could not ignore the challenge and tolerate a direct defiance of 
the Supreme Court. He responded by federalizing the Arkansas National Guard and sending in 1,000 
paratroopers from the Army's 101st Airborne Division to escort the students into the school in a dramatic 
standoff. This victory, however, was short-lived, as the very next year the governor closed all high schools 
to prevent further integration.
The year after the Brown decision, a controversy 
emerged over seating on city buses in Montgomery, 
Alabama. From this protest, a new leader named 
Martin Luther King, Jr. and a method of protest 
emerged that would revolutionize the fight for civil 
rights. Rosa Parks refused to give up her seat to a 
white passenger and was arrested in December 
1955. As Martin Luther King later described, “She was 
anchored to that seat by the accumulated indignities 
of days gone by and the boundless aspirations of 
generations yet unborn.” Local NAACP leaders, who 
had been looking for a test case, decided to challenge segregation by boycotting the city buses. King was 
a new preacher in town, and was chosen to head up the Montgomery Bus Boycott. He developed his 
personal philosophy of nonviolent resistance and Christian love – a mix of scripture, the example of 
Mahatma Gandhi, and other great thinkers to promote social change. At a mass meeting the night before 
the boycott King addressed the crowd, “If we are wrong, justice is a lie…history will look back and say’ 
there lived a race of people, black people…who had the moral courage to stand up for their rights. And 
thereby they injected a new meaning into the veins of history and civilization.” 
Taking part in the boycott was a risky business. Jobs were lost, police harassed those walking to work or 
offering rides through car pools. Originally planned as a one day event, the boycott lasted for 381 days, 
and ended when a federal court declared bus segregation unconstitutional. With this victory, the tactics 
of nonviolent direct action by the masses had been pioneered and proven successful. King and others 
founded the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) with other like-minded clergymen and 
looked for ways to continue the fight against segregation.
For the segregation that barred African Americans from public places, boycotting was not a workable 
strategy. And as activists had learned from Little Rock, federal protection would only come when the 
realities of segregation became impossible to ignore. In February 1960, a new phase of the movement 
began with a spontaneous demonstration by college students in Greensboro, North Carolina. Four 
205

freshmen sat down at a segregated lunch counter and asked to be served. The “sit-in” was born. More 
students came the next day, and soon news of the protest traveled as lunch counter sit-ins spread to 
thirty cities in seven southern states. It was a nonviolent direct protest, but in many cases was met with 
violence, and when police were called, protesters were arrested. 
By the summer of 1960, students held “read-ins'' at segregated libraries, ”wadeins” at public beaches, 
“watch-ins” at movie theaters, pray-ins, study-ins, and apply-ins (at all-white businesses). Students formed 
their own organization, the Student NonViolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) and proclaimed, “We do 
not intent to wait placidly for those rights which are already legally and morally ours to be meted out to us one 
at a time.” They believed in direct confrontation, mass action, and civil disobedience with a focus on nonviolence. Protesters were trained, “to protect the skull, fold the hands over the head, to prevent disfigurement 
of the face, bring the elbows together in front of the eyes. For girls, to prevent internal injury from kicks, lie on 
the side and ring the knees upward to the chin; for boys, knell down and arc over, with skull and face protected. 
Don’t strike back or curse if abused. Don’t laugh out…Don’t block entrances to the stores or aisles. Show yourself 
courteous and friendly at all times. Remember love and non-violence.” 
By the end of 1960, 70,000 people had taken part in sit-ins in over 100 cities in 20 states. Police arrested 
and jailed more than 3600 protesters, and authorities expelled 187 students from college because of 
their activities. Nevertheless, the new tactic worked, and the movement gained supporters and attention. 
This initiated a new phase in the civil rights struggle beyond legal challenges to a direct attack on 
segregation.
In the upper South, federal court orders and student sit-ins successfully desegregated lunch counters, 
theaters, hotels, public parks, churches, libraries, and beaches. But in three states--Alabama, Mississippi, 
and South Carolina--segregation in restaurants, hotels, and bus, train, and airplane terminals remained 
intact. In 1961, the Congress of Racial Equality (CORE) organized the Freedom Rides, an interracial group 
of CORE members and college students from the North who traveled by bus to test the effectiveness of a 
1960 Supreme Court decision which prohibited racial segregation in public accommodations, such as rest 
rooms, waiting rooms, and restaurants that catered to interstate travelers. They were met with violence 
and anger, and their bus was attacked and burned while local law enforcement failed to protect them. 
SNCC provided a new bus, and the ride continued, despite the call of President Kennedy for a “cooling off 
period.” The threat of continued racial violence in the South led the Kennedy administration to pressure 
the Interstate Commerce Commission to desegregate air, bus, and train terminals. In more than 300 
southern terminals, signs saying "white" and "colored" were taken down from waiting room entrances 
and lavatory doors. Direct non- violent protest continued as the 1960s progressed, focusing on 
segregation but also voting rights and economic opportunity. In response to the violence against 
protesters in Birmingham, Alabama, President Kennedy gave his first Civil Rights speech in the spring 
1963.
206

Kennedy Civil Rights Address – June 1963
We preach freedom around the world, and we mean it, and we cherish it here at home, but are we to 
say to the world, and much more importantly to each other, that this the land of the free except for the 
Negroes, that we have no second class citizens except Negroes…
It ought to be possible… for American students of any color to attend any public institution they select 
without having to be backed up by troops. It ought to be possible for American consumers of any color 
to receive equal service in places of public accommodation, such as hotels and restaurants and theaters 
and retail stores, without being forced to resort to demonstrations in the street, and it ought to be 
possible for American citizens of any color to register and to vote in a free election without interference 
or fear of reprisal. It ought to be possible, in short, for every American to enjoy the privileges of being 
American without regard to his race or his color. In short, every American ought to have the right to be 
treated as he would wish to be treated, as one would wish his children to be treated. But this is not the 
case…
This is not a sectional issue. Difficulties over segregation and discrimination exist in every state of the 
Union, producing in many cities a rising tide of discontent that threatens the public safety…
We are confronted primarily with a moral issue. It is as old as the scriptures…and is as clear as the 
American Constitution …The rights of every man are diminished when the rights of one man are 
threatened…One hundred years of delay have passed since President Lincoln freed the slaves, yet their 
heirs, their grandsons, are not fully free. They are not yet freed from the bonds of injustice. They are not 
yet freed from social and economic oppression. And this Nation, for all its hopes and all its boasts, will 
not be fully free until all its citizens are free.
In the summer of 1963, the high-water mark of a unified Civil Rights Movement came together in the 
March on Washington. It was a march to advocate the passage of a bill through Congress, as well as to 
mark the 100th anniversary of the Emancipation Proclamation. It attracted over 200,000 people to the 
Lincoln Memorial. It is here where Martin Luther King, Jr. gave his most famous speech.
I Have a Dream - August 1963 - Martin Luther King, Jr.
Now is the time to make real the promises of democracy. Now is the time to rise from the dark and 
desolate valley of segregation to the sunlit path of racial justice. Now is the time to lift our nation from 
the quicksands of racial injustice to the solid rock of brotherhood. Now is the time to make justice a 
reality for all of God's children… And so even though we face the difficulties of today and tomorrow, I 
still have a dream. It is a dream deeply rooted in the American dream.
207

I have a dream that one day this nation will rise up and live out the true meaning of its creed: "We hold 
these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal."
I have a dream that one day on the red hills of Georgia, the sons of former slaves and the sons of 
former slave owners will be able to sit down together at the table of brotherhood. I have a dream that 
one day even the state of Mississippi, a state sweltering with the heat of injustice, sweltering with the 
heat of oppression, will be transformed into an oasis of freedom and justice.
I have a dream that my four little children will one day live in a nation where they will not be judged by 
the color of their skin but by the content of their character. I have a dream today!
The Civil Rights Movement continued, through the March from Selma to Montgomery, the Civil Rights Act 
of 1964, Freedom Summer, and the Voting Rights Act of 1965. Towards the end of the 1960s, the 
movement that had focused on integration and nonviolence frayed, losing focus as many became 
frustrated with the pace of change and the aspirations that seemed unfulfilled. Different groups emerged 
such as the Black Panthers, the Black Power movement, and new leaders such as Malcolm X (whose 
slogan “by any means necessary” was in stark contrast to Martin Luther King) and Stokely Carmichael, 
who had begun as a leader of SNCC. The tactics of non-violence proved unsuccessful in fighting 
entrenched discrimination and structural racism that plagued the entire nation. Racial rioting increased 
as the 1960s ended, Martin Luther King, Jr. was assassinated, and the Vietnam War took attention away 
from the civil rights struggle. But the movement changed America, bringing to light the ugly truth of 
racism and segregation. It registered millions of voters, passed federal protections, and modeled the 
action and language of successful protest to other movements that would follow. The Red Power 
movement of Native Americans, Latino rights, the women’s rights movement that focused on gender 
equality, and in more recent times the push for LBGTQ rights all built upon the foundation and legacies 
of the Civil Rights Movement.
Immigration: From Open Door to Racial Quotas
The United States is a nation of immigrants, having experienced waves of newcomers beginning with the 
first colonists continuing until the present day. It is evidenced by the multi-cultural make-up of the 
country, as immigrants have profoundly shaped the development of the nation’s culture and heritage.
There have been two general characteristics of American immigration. First, all immigrants come to 
America because of economic, religious, social, or political oppression in their home country. They 
perceive that opportunities will be better in the United States. Although some immigrants may come for 
only one of those reasons, the push and pull of immigration can have interrelated causes. An immigrant 
208

could come for religious freedom, but also for economic opportunity, or to be with her family that has 
already immigrated.
Second, most immigration to America has come in waves. In other words, immigration from a specific 
part of the world (Ireland for example) is connected to a particular time period where the push of 
deteriorating conditions in one country pulled a large number of immigrants to travel to the United 
States. This characteristic of immigration helps explain why immigrants have been both welcomed and 
rejected by those who have come before. New immigrants are seen by those already established as being 
less similar in cultural background and therefore less acceptable.
Chronological Review of Immigration Waves
1607 Jamestown established as first European settlement in North America 
1619 First Africans delivered to Jamestown
1790 Naturalization Act - limited naturalization to immigrants who were “free white persons” of “good 
moral character
1798 Alien and Sedition Acts restrict the freedoms of speech and press among non- naturalized 
immigrants
1840 Cherokee Indians forcibly removed from Georgia to the Indian Territory in the “Trail of Tears”
1840s Famine in Ireland forces thousands to immigrate to America 
1847 Mormons forced to flee Missouri and enter Mexican Territory for religious freedom
209

1882 Chinese Exclusion Act prohibits further immigration of Chinese laborers (after transcontinental 
railroad completed)
1890-1914 Millions of “new immigrants” from Southern and Eastern Europe travel to the United States, 
largely Catholic and Jewish, were seen as markedly socially and culturally different from those immigrants 
who arrived earlier from Northern and Western Europe
1908 Gentlemen’s Agreement between Japan and the United States unofficially ending immigration from 
that country
1924 National Origins Act (1924) - Severely restricted immigration by establishing a system of national 
quotas, based on the 1890 census, aimed at ending all Asian immigration and severely limiting 
immigration from Southern and Eastern Europe (in effect until the 1960s)
1942 Bracero Program - allowed temporary contract laborers from Mexico for wartime production
1965 Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965 - replaced national origins quota system based on race 
and/or ethnic origins with system focused on work skills and family relationships, opening the door to 
immigrants from Asia, Africa, and the Middle East
1960s-1970s Increased immigration from Asia and Southeast Asia in the wave of Korean and Vietnam 
Wars
1980s-1990s Increased support for stronger immigration restrictions especially aimed at Mexico and 
Latin America
1986 Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 required employers to attest to their employees’ 
immigration status, and granted amnesty to certain illegal immigrants
2015- 2022 Continued political debate about immigration policy, primarily from Mexico and Latin 
America, as well as concerns about terrorism from other parts of the world 
210

During the early years of colonial settlement, the arrival of immigrants was welcomed as a positive 
development, as the new land needed a steady stream of laborers, and immigrants provided a solution 
to the labor shortage. Slavery was a part of the answer to that problem - a forced immigration solution to 
provide workers. Indentured servitude was also a piece of the puzzle. A few colonial Americans, like 
Benjamin Franklin, expressed concerns about those immigrants who were not Protestant or did not 
speak English, particularly the Germans. As he wrote in 1753, “Few of their children in the country learn 
English... The signs in our streets have inscriptions in both languages ... Unless the stream of their 
importation could be turned, they will soon so outnumber us that all the advantages we have will not be 
able to preserve our language, and even our government will become precarious.” There was also a 
virulent stream of anti-Catholicism in the colonies.
However, in the early years of the nation, as most citizens were immigrants or of recent immigrant stock, 
the benefits of immigration seemed to outweigh the fears, and there were no limitations on immigration. 
Yet as different waves of immigration landed on shore, there were those who found reason for concern. 
Irish immigration in the 1840s, making up more than half of those who came during that decade, 
211

drastically changed the ethnic make-up of Eastern cities, and were largely Catholic. Negative stereotypes 
of the Irish abounded, and a political party, the Know-Nothings, organized largely around an antiimmigrant, anti-Irish platform.
Another wave of immigration, the “new” 
immigrants who arrived between 1890 and 
1914, were also seen as a dangerous horde, too 
different in language, religion, politics, and 
physical characteristics to truly assimilate and 
become part of the melting pot of America. They 
came from Southern and Eastern Europe -
Czechs, Poles, Russian, Greeks, Turks, Italians, 
who were largely Catholic and Jewish - and Asia -
Chinese and Japanese, who were largely 
Buddhists, Shintoists, and Confucianists.
Many saw these immigrants’ religious and 
political backgrounds as dangerous to American 
life. The following document by Josiah Strong, a Protestant clergyman and activist, demonstrates the idea 
that “our country” made up of superior “Anglo-Saxon” people must be protected from the unrestrained 
influence of outsiders.
Josiah Strong - “Our Country” (1885)
Thoughtful men see perils on our national horizon. Our argument is concerned not with all of them, but 
only with those which peculiarly threaten the West.
America, as the land of promise to all the world, is the destination of the most remarkable migration of 
which we have any record….During the 100 years 15 million foreigners have made their homes in the 
United States…
So immense a foreign element must have a profound influence on our national life and character. 
Consider briefly the moral and political influence of immigration. The typical immigrant is a European 
peasant, whose horizon has been narrow, whose moral and religious training has been meager or false, 
and whose ideas of life are low. Not a few belong to the pauper and criminal classes… Immigration not 
only furnishes the greater portion of our criminals, it is also seriously affecting the morals of the native 
population. It is a disease and not health which is contagious. Most foreigners bring with them 
212

congenital ideas of the Sabbath, and the result is sadly manifest in all our cities, where it is being 
transformed from a holy day into a holiday…
We can only glance at the political aspects of immigration…Immigration furnishes most of the Victims of 
Mormonism and there is a Mormon vote. Immigration is the strength of the Catholic church; and there 
is a Catholic vote. Immigration is the mother and nurse of American socialism; and there is to be a 
socialist vote. Immigration tends strongly to the cities, and gives to them their political complexion. And 
there is no more serious menace to our civilization than our rabble-ruled cities.
An open door policy in the early years of the Republic gave way to calls for limitations, based on race and 
attempting to block the arrival of certain nationalities. Many felt that the United States should remain a 
Protestant country of people from Northern Europe, This fear resulted in the passage of legislation that 
restricted the numbers and types of immigrants allowed into the country, ending the Open Door policy 
that had reigned since colonial times. This legislation included the Chinese Exclusion Act (1882), the 
Gentlemen’s Agreement (1908 Japan), and the National Origins Act of 1924 (Southern and Eastern Europe 
and Asia). The act of 1924 instituted quotas from the 1890 census, which limited immigration from 
“undesirable” nations that had made up the “new immigrants.”
Americans have always been ambivalent about immigration, despite the proclamation found on the 
Statue of Liberty - “Give me your tired, your poor, your huddled masses yearning to breathe free.” They 
have feared that a large number of immigrants, particularly those seen as too different to easily 
assimilate into the dominant culture, could overwhelm American culture and dangerously alter American 
politics and government. While America has always seen itself as a refuge for the oppressed, there has 
always been a counter strain of nativism, and a realization that immigration must have limits. Here is just 
one example of those countervailing forces. In the 1930s, Jews fleeing Germany made it within sight of 
the Statue of Liberty before they were forcibly turned back and returned to Europe and its concentration 
camps. The desire to keep out the “other” proved more powerful than the desire to give asylum to a 
violently persecuted minority.
Since the 1960s the United States has undergone another demographic shift, partly as a result of the 
Immigration Act of 1965, that opened up areas of the world and changed the make-up of immigrants, 
ending the nation-based quota system and encouraging family chain migration. The act brought much 
larger numbers than Congress had anticipated, particularly from Mexico and Latin America. A general 
improvement in the European economy, worsening conditions in Latin America, the war in Vietnam, and 
the system of family preference resulted in a drastic shift to a focus on non-European countries, 
especially those of the Third World. The response has been typical and echoes the historical pattern -
questions of assimilation, “otherness,” impact on the economy, fears of criminality, and racism. 
213

Just as in the case of civil rights, immigrants have been scrutinized, discriminated against, and denied 
access to full participation in American society throughout its history. Decisions surrounding immigration 
continue to evoke strong emotions and foster heated controversial debate, in recent years focusing on 
immigration from Mexico and Latin America. Of all people, Latter-Day Saints should see themselves as 
champions of minority protections, as they have experienced in their history the danger of a tyrannical 
majority.
Now that the church is more accepted, it is tempting to identify with the majority and see minority 
protections as a threat or inconvenience. It is easy to forget that all it takes is a turn in public opinion to 
place us in a position where we again need those same protections. In 2011, in response to harsh 
immigration laws passed in Arizona, the Church issued the statement below. It declared that an 
“enforcement only” approach to immigration fails the moral standard Latter-Day Saints must hold 
themselves to.
OFFICIAL STATEMENT - The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints 
- June 2011
Around the world, debate on the immigration question has become intense. That is especially so in the 
United States. Most Americans agree that the federal government of the United States should secure its 
borders and sharply reduce or eliminate the flow of undocumented immigrants. Unchecked and 
unregulated, such a flow may destabilize society and ultimately become unsustainable.
As a matter of policy, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints discourages its members from 
entering any country without legal documentation, and from deliberately overstaying legal travel visas.
What to do with the estimated 12 million undocumented immigrants now residing in various states within 
the United States is the biggest challenge in the immigration debate. The bedrock moral issue for The 
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is how we treat each other as children of God.
The history of mass expulsion or mistreatment of individuals or families is cause for concern especially 
where race, culture, or religion are involved. This should give pause to any policy that contemplates 
targeting any one group, particularly if that group comes mostly from one heritage.
As those on all sides of the immigration debate in the United States have noted, this issue is one that must 
ultimately be resolved by the federal government. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is 
concerned that any state legislation that only contains enforcement provisions is likely to fall short of the 
high moral standard of treating each other as children of God.
214

The Church supports an approach where undocumented immigrants are allowed to square themselves 
with the law and continue to work without this necessarily leading to citizenship.
In furtherance of needed immigration reform in the United States, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day 
Saints supports a balanced and civil approach to a challenging problem, fully consistent with its tradition 
of compassion, its reverence for family, and its commitment to law.
The long history of immigration policy -nativism, quotas, economic fears - continues to reverberate today, 
echoed in the political debates over current immigration policy. The disconnect between supply and 
demand in the labor economy continues to drive illegal immigration. There are a very limited quota of 
green cards issued to those who wish to immigrate legally, but do not have preferred skills or job 
connections.
When Alabama successfully reduced the number of illegal laborers in their state in 2013, their crops 
rotted in the fields, proving pretty decisively that many of these jobs are niche jobs that would not be 
filled by native-born Americans. There is a huge debate on the net cost of illegal immigration, whether the 
societal costs of providing emergency, medical, school, and welfare services is balanced by the taxes they 
pay in local economies. Those using false identification have wages withheld for SSI, FICA, and state and 
federal income taxes, yet will never collect Social Security or Medicare and do not file for tax refunds, 
giving a bonus to those programs. But the larger cost and danger is to public virtue, as this “cash 
economy” operates in the shadows, ripe for corruption and exploitation in human trafficking, drugs and 
guns, and difficult to police or regulate. Immigration policy must confront the labor needs of an economy 
that pulls in millions of unskilled laborers, and create a path where legal immigration is possible and 
regulated in a fair and just way.
Japanese Internment - Racism and Fear in Wartime
The Japanese were barred from immigrating after the Immigration Act of 1924. The law also prohibited 
naturalization, leaving the children of immigrants the only ones eligible for citizenship if they were born in 
215

the United States. There were approximately 260,000 Japanese people living in the United States before 
World War II. 
The larger portion lived in 
Hawaii, but 120,000 
Japanese lived on the 
mainland, mostly 
concentrated in farming 
communities on the West 
Coast. After the attack on 
Pearl Harbor, rumors of 
espionage and sabotage ran 
rampant, with many fearful 
that an attack on the West 
Coast was possible and 
imminent. From the 
beginning, the war against 
Japan had a very different 
tenor than the fight against 
Germany. Troops were said 
to be fighting Hitler, but 
battling the Japanese. 
The Japanese enemy was often portrayed as subhuman in war propaganda, advertisements, movies, 
comic strips, and the newspapers. There had been a long history of anti-Japanese sentiment on the West 
Coast and tensions in the communities where they lived, and the war only increased that sentiment. The 
first months of the war went well for Japan, increasing the anxiety in the country but particularly on the 
West Coast. A Japanese submarine was found near the California Coast, and news of sabotage and spying 
in other countries seemed to imply that the United States could also easily fall victim to subversion from 
within. Newspapers published rumors with banner headlines - “Enemy Planes Sighted Over CA Coast,” 
“Caps on Japanese Tomato Plants Point to Air Base,” “Japanese Vegetables Found Free of Poison.” 
By January of 1942, calls for the relocation of Japanese people away from the West Coast reached a fever 
pitch, most notably amongst the Japanese farmers’ competitors. As an article in the Saturday Evening 
Post explained, “We’re charged with wanting to get rid of the Japs for selfish reasons. We might as well be 
honest. We do. It’s a question of whether the white man lives on the Pacific Coast or the brown man. They came 
216

into this valley to work, and they stayed to take over…If all the Japs were removed tomorrow, we’d never miss 
them in two weeks, because the white farmers can take over and produce everything the Jap grows. And we 
don’t want them back when the war ends either.”
On February 16, 1942, President Roosevelt issued Executive Order 9066, which authorized the War 
Department to designate military areas and to exclude any or all persons under the general war powers 
and military necessity granted to the president. It never mentioned the Japanese specifically, but it was 
aimed directly at that population. The entire West Coast was designated a military area, and its intent was 
to remove all those of Japanese ancestry, citizens or not, from the states of Oregon, Washington, 
California, part of Arizona and other selected areas and place them in “concentration camps” in the 
interior of the United States. There was no action taken against the Japanese population in Hawaii, who 
were a larger group, more difficult to relocate, and more important to the Hawaiian economy.
Executive Order 9066 – 1942
Whereas the successful prosecution of the war requires every possible protection against espionage and 
against sabotage to national-defense material, national defense premises, and national-defense 
utilities…
Now, therefore, by virtue of the authority vested in me as President of the United States, and 
Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy, I hereby authorize and direct the Secretary of War, and the 
Military Commanders whom he may from time to time designate, whenever he or any designated 
Commander deems such action necessary or desirable, to prescribe military areas in such places and of 
such extent as he or the appropriate Military Commander may determine, from which any or all 
persons may be excluded, and with respect to which, the right of any person to enter, remain in, or leave 
shall be subject to whatever restrictions the Secretary of War or the appropriate Military Commander
may impose in his discretion. The Secretary of War is hereby authorized to provide for residents of any 
such area who are excluded therefrom, such transportation, food, shelter, and other accommodations 
as may be necessary, in the judgment of the Secretary of War or the said Military Commander, and until 
other arrangements are made, to accomplish the purpose of this order. The designation of military 
areas in any region or locality shall supersede designations of prohibited and restricted areas by the 
Attorney General under the Proclamations of December 7 and 8, 1941, and shall supersede the 
responsibility and authority of the Attorney General under the said Proclamations in respect of such 
prohibited and restricted areas.
I hereby further authorize and direct the Secretary of War and the said Military Commanders to take 
such other steps as he or the appropriate Military Commander may deem advisable to enforce 
compliance with the restrictions applicable to each Military area herein above authorized to be 
217

designated, including the use of Federal troops and other Federal Agencies, with authority to accept 
assistance of state and local agencies. I hereby further authorize and direct all Executive Departments, 
independent establishments and other Federal Agencies, to assist the Secretary of War or the said 
Military Commanders in carrying out this Executive Order, including the furnishing of medical aid, 
hospitalization, food, clothing, transportation, use of land, shelter, and other supplies, equipment, 
utilities, facilities, and services.
This order shall not be construed as modifying or limiting in any way the authority heretofore granted 
under Executive Order No. 8972, dated December 12, 1941, nor shall it be construed as limiting or 
modifying the duty and responsibility of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, with respect to the 
investigation of alleged acts of sabotage or the duty and responsibility of the Attorney General and the 
Department of Justice under the Proclamations of December 7 and 8, 1941, prescribing regulations for 
the conduct and control of alien enemies, except as such duty and responsibility is superseded by the 
designation of military areas hereunder. - Franklin D. Roosevelt The White House, February 19, 1942
How was Japanese internment defended? The evidence and arguments for relocation stemmed from 
new wartime fear and long-held racism against the Japanese. The Western Defense Command argued 
that the lack of evidence of Japanese subversion was even more evidence that it existed - “The very fact 
that no sabotage has taken place to date is a disturbing and confirming indication that such action will 
be taken.” Of the 120,000 people relocated, 2/3 of those were United States citizens (the remaining 1/3 
could not become citizens because of the Immigration Act of 1924). And if the Japanese people wanted 
to prove their loyalty? As one California congressman argued, “I submit that if an American born 
Japanese, who is a citizen, is really patriotic and wishes to make his contribution to the safety and 
welfare of his country, right here is his opportunity to do so, namely that by permitting himself to be 
placed in a concentration camp, he would be making his sacrifice and he should be willing to do it if he 
is patriotic and is working for us. As against his sacrifice, millions of other native-born citizens are 
willing to lay down their lives, which is a far greater sacrifice, than being placed in a concentration 
camp.”
The California State Attorney General issued a decision in support of Japanese internment in the guise 
of national security (ironically, this same Judge would later join the Supreme Court, and help pass the 
unanimous Brown v. Board of Education decision).
218

In Support of Evacuation, 1942, California State Attorney General Earl 
Warren
A wave of organized sabotage in California accompanied by an actual air raid or even by a prolonged 
black-out could not only be more destructive to life and property but could result in retarding the entire 
war effort of this Nation far more than the treacherous bombing of Pearl Harbor.
…Many of our people in other parts of the country are of the opinion that because we have had no 
sabotage…activities in this State since the beginning of the war, that means that none have been 
planned for us. But I take the view that this is the most ominous sign in our whole situation.
…We believe that when we are dealing with the Caucasian race we have methods that will test the 
loyalty of them, and we believe that we can, in dealing with the Germans and the Italians, arrive at some 
fairly sound conclusions because of our knowledge of the way they live…But when we deal with the 
Japanese we are in an entirely different field and we cannot form any opinion that we believe to be 
sound…
Many Japanese who are now roaming around the State and roaming around the Western States…will 
unquestionably bring about race riots and prejudice and hysteria and excesses of all kinds…
…In time of war, every citizen must give up some of his normal rights.
Japanese people on the West Coast were first given a few days to dispose of or secure their personal 
property, and were gathered in various detention centers and then shipped to ten concentration 
camps throughout the West. It was difficult to find places for the camps, as they required large tracts 
of land not near any “military” sites, which guaranteed they would be placed in inhospitable and 
barren desert areas in California, Idaho, Wyoming, Utah, and Arizona, where no one had lived before, 
and no one has lived since. Almost all cooperated with the army’s orders. The environment of the 
camps was much like a prison, with watchtowers, fences, and barbed wire. The camps were dusty, 
hastily built, and living conditions were difficult, and had a stark impact on the Japanese families who 
lived there held as prisoners without legal recourse. 6000 new American citizens were born in the 
camps. 18,000 Japanese-American men won release from those camps to fight for the United States 
Army, making up some of the most decorated army units in the European theater.
There were several court challenges during the war that questioned the constitutionality of 
internment. One of these cases involved Fred Korematsu, who refused to report for transportation to 
a relocation center, tried to enlist twice but was turned down because of a physical disability. He was 
arrested, convicted, and sent to an internment camp in Utah. His case went all the way to the 
219

Supreme Court which upheld the internment order by a six to three vote. Current legal scholars deem 
this to be one of the worst Supreme Court decisions ever.
Exclusion and Internment Upheld, 1944, Supreme Court Decision 
Korematsu v. United States
The petitioner, an American citizen of Japanese descent, was convicted in a federal district court for 
remaining in San Leandro, California, a “Military Area,” contrary to Civilian Exclusion Order…No 
question was raised as to the petitioner’s
loyalty to the United States. Exclusion was deemed necessary because of the presence of an 
unascertained number of disloyal members of the group, most of whom we have no doubt were loyal to 
this country....
To cast this case into outlines of racial prejudice, without reference to the real military dangers which 
were presented, merely confuses the issue. Korematsu was not excluded from the Military Area because 
of hostility to him or his race. He was excluded because we are at war with the Japanese Empire, 
because the properly constituted military authorities feared an invasion of our West Coast and felt 
constrained to take proper security measures.
Camps began closing in late 1944, as whatever remote possibility of Japanese invasion was past and 
fear had lessened. Japanese prisoners were released and attempted to rebuild their lives. 
Unfortunately, during the four year interim, properties had been sold and homes had been lost. There 
weren't many places for camp detainees to go, and few had homes to which to return. Many of them 
resettled in the West and created new and scattered communities. In the 1970s, a movement began to 
recognize these wartime wrongs and the constitutional mistake of Japanese Internment. In 1983, a 
federal civil rights committee determined that internment had been the result of “unsubstantiated 
facts, distortions, and misrepresentation of at least one military commander whose views were 
affected by racism.” With the passage of the Civil Liberties Act in 1988, $20,000 was given to each of the 
60,000 surviving internees as reparations for their economic losses as a result of internment. Fred 
Korematzu was also awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom for his role in challenging the 
constitutionality of the forced removal and relocation of American citizens. President Reagan issued an 
apology that same year.
President Ronald Reagan’s Apology, 1988
We gather here today to right a grave wrong. More than 40 years ago, shortly after the bombing of Pearl 
Harbor, 120,000 persons of Japanese ancestry living in the United States were forcibly removed from 
220

their homes and placed in makeshift internment camps. The action was taken without trial, without jury. 
It was based solely on race…Yes, the Nation was at war, struggling for its survival, and it’s not for us 
today to pass judgment upon those who may have made mistakes while engaged in that great struggle. 
Yet we must recognize that the internment of Japanese-Americans was just that: a mistake.
As we examine these incidents and trends in the past, it is important to recognize the human and 
natural man tendency towards pride, fear, and competitiveness. These forces can damage individuals 
and society, and help support otherwise unthinkable actions, and despite serious progress over the 
last 250 years, can still plague our hearts and communities.
Yet the trend toward inclusion and equality, and the ways in which constitutional protections have 
been expanded beyond their original intent, continues to manifest the divine nature of those 
aspirations, giving people more access to agency and freedom to realize their potential. Looking at 
what one might consider the negative side of the American Foundation can be difficult as well as 
inspiring, as we contemplate the living nature of the United States Constitution and the role we play in 
supporting the principles of equal protection under the law. The Book of Mormon gives us the perfect 
example of the type of society we should be striving for with regard to social, cultural, racial, and 
ethnic differences, as we try to treat others as equal children of our Heavenly Father and our brothers 
and sisters.
4 Nephi 15-17
15 And it came to pass that there was no contention in the land, because of the love of God which 
did dwell in the hearts of the people.
16 And there were no envyings, nor strifes, nor tumults, nor whoredoms, nor lyings, nor murders, 
nor any manner of lasciviousness; and surely there could not be a happier people among all the people 
who had been created by the hand of God.
17 There were no robbers, nor murderers, neither were there Lamanites, nor any manner of -ites; 
but they were in one, the children of Christ, and heirs to the kingdom of God