Week 3: The Patriot Philosophers

The colonial response to specific British policies and laws became a catalyst for an unprecedented
discussion and debate in America about the nature of liberty and freedom and how the rights and
liberties of the people might best be protected. In an amazingly short decade following the French and
Indian War, an unbridgeable separation developed between England and the colonies. John Adams
described the sea change of attitude this way in 1774: “I am surprised at the suddenness as well as
greatness of this revolution. … Is not the change we have seen astonishing? Would any man, two years
ago have believed it possible, to accomplish such an alteration in the prejudices, passions, sentiments,
and principles of these thirteen little states as to make every one of them completely republican, and to
make them own it? Idolatry to monarchs, and servility to aristocratical pride, was never so totally
eradicated, from so many minds in so short a time.”

This gulf developed because of rebellious colonists, who were passionate and willing to take direct action
against the taxes and institutions created by Parliament represented by British officials living in North
America. Examples of this direct action would be the taunting of British soldiers that led to the Boston
Massacre, the throwing of tea into Boston Harbor during the Boston Tea Party, and the minutemen who
came together as colonial militias against the British at Lexington and Concord and at Bunker Hill.
Another group, less involved in direct action, provided the philosophy and justifications behind the
struggle. The writings and philosophies of those who we now consi der the Founding Fathers, or “patriot
philosophers,” provided the intellectual theories and justification that supported the rebellion against
British rule. These men were enormously important in making sense of the revolution and the move
toward independence, and in creating the framework for a new way of thinking about government and
Freedom.

There were hundreds of men of letters and learning who shaped the appeal for liberty, creating a
revolution of thinking even before the Revolution was fought. Their essays, editorials, and speeches filled
hundreds of pages with carefully and skillfully articulated arguments for liberty and self-government.
Some of the more recognizable names were Samuel Adams, John Adams, Thomas Jefferson, Benjamin
Franklin, and Thomas Paine. They desired to preserve their liberty, to justify their rebellion against
England, and eventually to create new forms of government based on the lessons of ancient and modern
forms. They drew upon all available sources and traditions: books on English law, history, and political
philosophy; the Bible; the writings of Christian philosophers and historians; the writings of classical
antiquity—Homer, Plato, Aristotle, Cicero, Cato, Justinian, and Tacitus; and the political philosophers of
the Enlightenment—Newton, Bacon, Locke, Montesquieu, Voltaire, and Rousseau. They also drew on 150

37


years of experience with self-government in the colonies, 3000 miles away from England, Parliament, and
the King.

As they examined this accumulated knowledge, they began to see a difference between the theory of
British government and its practice in the colonies, and they began to look beyond current English
practice for a different kind of rule. As the rebellion and resistance to British policies continued, many of
the patriot philosophers focused their arguments on discovering and illuminating the principles that
must be embodied in any form of government that could truly be called “good.” First, they were greatly
concerned about the ever-present threat of tyranny and anarchy. They knew the struggles under various
tyrants throughout the world’s history. They also knew that when people had attempted to throw off
tyrants and gain their freedom, they had generally rushed head-long into a state of anarchy and failed to
create a successful new government. While understanding these dangers, many of these thinkers
believed they could create a form of government that could stop the unending cycle of these forces,
despite the difficulty in controlling the power of those who govern and channeling the passions and
excesses of the people they rule.

Through their study, the patriot philosophers concluded that to create true liberty—the ideal of a lasting,
stable liberty—the quest for freedom must be tempered by a certain level of order. They concluded that
true liberty was not the ability to act without restraint, but the ability to balance freedom of action with
order and restraint. Too much freedom fostered anarchy, too much restraint led to tyranny. True liberty,
they felt, would be located somewhere between those two conditions. Where that sweet spot of true
liberty was, depended to some extent on the ability of the people to practice self-restraint. If the people
were willing to restrain themselves, more freedom could be allowed. If they could not restrain
themselves, more control was required. Unless most restraint was self-imposed, any government would
be tempted to enact more and more laws until freedom disappeared and tyranny reigned.

With the nature of true liberty established, the next question centered on the virtue of the people. Were
the people of the British colonies in fact virtuous enough to restrain themselves and live within the
bounds of freedom, or did they need some form of repressive government to protect them from their
own passions and the lack of virtue of others? This led to an examination of human nature and how that
might fit into a political theory that attempted to maximize true liberty. The prevailing pessimistic view of
the 1700s was of humanity plagued by their fallen and degenerate state, to a greater or lesser extent
depraved, ignorant, and even evil. Based on this view of human nature, there could be no faith in the
common people’s ability for self-government. This view also justified rule by a hereditary royal monarch,
chosen by God through birth who ruled under the “divine right of kings” over his subjects. Tyranny over
the unruly masses could also be justified and opened the door to understanding the tendency towards
anarchy when left to their own devices without a strong ruler. The opposing view of human nature was

38


the higher aspiration of what people were capable of becoming if enticed by morality, society, and
circumstances.

What the founders decided through their study and discussion was a balanced view bringing together
these two opposing components. There was sufficient evidence for the pessimistic view of human nature.
Laziness, licentiousness, passion, and corruptibility seemed to exist in all people to some degree and
throughout human history. When the patriot philosophers examined human nature, they noted its
corruptibility: the love of promotion and private advantage; the love of honor and personal glory; the
desire for wealth, influence, and to exercise power over others. They noted the human susceptibility to
sin which made people subject to error, imperfection, and temptation to do evil, the ever-present
dangers of factionalism, the power of charismatic demagogues, and the tendency towards moral laziness
which prevented the fulfillment of important civic duties. However, the patriot philosophers understood
that certain positive qualities and characteristics had also been implanted in the human soul. They
examined the human capacity for compassion, goodness, and human decency; tender and social
affections; and the expression of sadness and empathy. They recognized the human capacity for
education and rationality that gave people the ability to read and understand difficult principles, to
compromise and reach political solutions, and to apply the natural laws of justice and equity. And they
also noted the human capacity for public cooperation, which fostered working together for the common
good and to pursue common interests.

Which of these two extremes of human nature would win out in a government where the people
governed themselves? For the patriot philosophers, understanding the role of self-interest gave them
hope for the predominance of the optimistic view of human nature. Self-interest did have negative
potential; it could lead to selfishness, greediness, and to the abuse of power or uncontrolled passion. But
self-interest also had a positive aspect as a natural and God-given part of the human soul, necessary for
life and self-preservation. It was a product of the capacity to reason, and it could motivate people in
positive ways. The patriot philosophers felt members of a rational society would choose to curb negative
self-interest in favor of the benefits of self government.

This view of the nature of man justified their belief in the possibility of a government by the people
arising from the popular will. Although it could never be guaranteed that people would curb their
corruptible tendencies, the benefits of self-government would lead most to do so, and if government was
structured appropriately, controls could be built into the system to prevent the corruptible side of human
nature from destroying the system with ambition and self-interest.

What form of government would be able to balance these sides of human nature? As they studied, they
determined that the best forms of government were either a republic or a democracy. They knew they
wanted to promote “democratic” principles, the participation of the people in their government, and the

39


protection of the individual, as well as “republican” principles of representation. There were important
distinctions between a republican form of government and a democratic one. A republic was a specific
“form” of popular government, with decision-making authority given to representatives of the people. In
other words, in a republican form of government, virtuous people chose representatives, and allowed
those representatives to make laws on their behalf. A democracy meant a popular government in which
the people directly controlled the making of the laws. In either case, they believed that these
governments must be small geographically and demographically, which would limit the development of
factions, the accompanying decline of virtue, and the collapse of government. Although they wanted to
create a government in which the people were actively involved, they worried about the potential of a
pure democracy to be undermined either by bickering between factions or by becoming subject to the
passions and prejudices of the darker side of human nature. In the end, they determined that a republic
offered the best opportunity for success as it could better filter and insulate the passions of the people
and prevent the formation of factions.

Another concern for the patriot philosophers was determining what laws governments should establish
and what rights were to be protected by those laws. They sought to find some standard to guide them in
identifying those laws and rights, and the principle and concept of natural law provided that standard.
The idea of natural law was a recurring theme of the Enlightenment period and was readily accepted by
the colonists as an eternal truth and a manifestation of their strong belief in the will of God and his
“higher law.” Natural law revealed true moral pr inciples and boundaries that fostered true liberty and
happiness for individuals and societies, and explained the true origin and necessity of civil government. It
was the “social contract” theory based on the idea that people would voluntarily form a gove rnment only
if that government would protect and secure their rights and privileges. Man-made laws were invalid if
they were contrary to natural laws, and only governments that recognized and complied with natural
laws would ultimately achieve success. Focusing on natural law, which stood above and superior to man-
made laws, gave confidence to those seeking revolution. For the patriot philosophers, appealing to
natural law justified both their resistance and rebellion and their belief in the people’s basic right to
govern themselves and not to acquiesce to the far away power of King and Parliament.

(Note: The social contract theory had traditionally argued that the contract was between the people and
the king, a widely held and powerful idea. The people agreed to be ruled by the king if the king agreed to
rule his subjects with benevolence. The discussions of the patriot philosophers created a subtle but
significant variation on this traditional understanding. For them, the social contract was an agreement
among the people whereby they agreed to delegate enough political authority, held collectively by the
people, to a government that agreed to protect the natural rights and liberties of the people.)

40


This idea of natural law and the ways in which it is discovered was well described by Sir William
Blackstone, an English judge and politician who wrote about these issues at the time of the American
Revolution, and whose words were often referred to in the writings of the colonists:

“Man, considered as a creature, must necessarily be subject to the laws of his creator, for he is
entirely a dependent being. … And consequently, as man depends absolutely upon his maker for
every thing, it is necessary that he should in all points conform to his maker's will. “This will of his
maker is called the law of nature. For as God, when he created matter, and endued it with a
principle of mobility, established certain rules for the perpetual direction of that motion; so, when
he created man, and endued him with freewill to conduct himself in all parts of life, he laid down
certain immutable laws of human nature, whereby that freewill is in some degree regulated and
restrained, and gave him also the faculty of reason to discover the purport of those laws…

“But as [God] is also a be ing of infinite wisdom, he has laid down only such laws as were founded in those
relations of justice, that existed in the nature of things… These are the eternal, immutable laws of good
and evil, to which the creator himself in all his dispensations conforms; and which he has enabled human
reason to discover, so far as they are necessary for the conduct of human actions. Such among others
are these principles: that we should live honestly, should hurt nobody, and should render to every one
his due…

“As the refore the creator is a being, not only of infinite power, and wisdom, but also of infinite goodness,
he has been pleased so to contrive the constitution and frame of humanity, that we should want no other
prompter to inquire after and pursue the rule of right, but only our own self-love [self-interest], that
universal principle of action. For he has so intimately connected, so inseparably interwoven the laws of
eternal justice with the happiness of each individual, that [happiness] cannot be attained but by
observing the [laws of justice]… In consequence of which mutual connection of justice and human felicity,
he … has graciously reduced the rule of obedience to this one paternal precept, “that man should pursue
his own true and substantial happiness.” This is the foundation of what we call ethics, or natural law. …
“This law of nature, being coeval with mankind and dictated by God himself, is of course superior in
obligation to any other. It is binding over all the globe in all countries, and at all times: no human laws are
of any validity, if contrary to this…”

Emerging from the discussion of natural laws came the concept of unalienable rights, as Blackstone
argued, that were “dictated by God himself.” These basic rights were not the gifts of government b ut were
something the people had by their very nature. If the government went beyond its granted authority to
protect and secure the rights of mankind, resistance and rebellion were justified. These basic natural
rights included life, liberty, happiness, property, conscience, and equality. For the patriot philosophers,
there would be no foundation or justification for these unalienable rights without natural law. Basing the

41


idea of rights on natural law was an important step for the patriot philosophers. It gave them a clear
point of reference to use in determine what in fact was a right to be protected by government and what
was merely a privilege or benefit.

There are many terms associated with the word “rights.” Constitutional rights are those that flow from
the Constitution. The Constitution and its first ten amendments (the Bill of Rights) were designed to
identify and protect the unalienable, or natural rights, as identified by the founders. In addition, civil and
legal rights are rights that flow out of legislative or judicial action. In the case of civil and legal rights, the
judicial and legal action that established them came most often in an attempt to clarify, define, or protect
the unalienable rights outlined by the founders and protected by the Constitution.

In modern times, the connection between unalienable rights and natural law is often obscured. In the
18th century, natural law was intertwined with God’s laws for the universe, yet today’s world has
separated these two ideas in the political debate. Missing this connection, however, can be problematic
when it leads to the idea that all rights originate in judicial or civil action. If rights flow out of the public
debate or common consent, then theoretically anything can become a right, even i f it violates God’s laws,
if a majority of the people agree that it should be a right. Without the basis in natural law, there is no
measure as to whether something is in fact a right or simply the will of a majority or minority part of the
population. Once established as a right, it must then be protected and guaranteed by the government.

After the foundation of natural law and the unalienable rights that flowed from it, next on the patriot
philosophers’ list of fundamental concepts was the importance of r ule of law. Rule of law was the concept
that laws should govern society and that all the people in that society ought to freely submit themselves
to be governed by those laws. But for rule of law to truly exist in a free, self-governing society, the people,
including those who are given power to govern, must have a tradition of respect for certain basic
principles and common values. If rule of law is to exist and survive, the people must embrace and live by
three important principles. First, liberty can not be forced. Liberty must be chosen, or people are not truly
free. People must choose to live by the principles of self-restraint that allow liberty to exist.

This becomes most important in times of conflict or disaster when there is a great temptation to set aside
previously established laws or principles of freedom in the name of safety and security or when people
give into their passions and descend into anarchy. The 2000 presidential election in the United States
provides a good example of this aspect of rule of law. The weeks and months leading up to the election
had been filled with tough campaigning and political rhetoric. In an unusual turn of events, election night
produced no clear winner. The popular and electoral vote was close. Al Gore led in the popular vote but
George Bush led in the Electoral College count. The decision came down to the state of Florida with its 25
electoral votes. Out of twenty-five million votes cast in Florida only six hundred votes separated the two
candidates, triggering an automatic recount and then another. The days and months went by with no

42


clear winner. Accusations of voter fraud and abnormalities were rampant, and lawyers for the candidates
filed lawsuits and stays of the vote recounting. Finally, the United States Supreme Court ended the
recount in December 2000, giving George Bush the slight majority in the popular vote, and therefore the
Florida electoral count. This was the fourth election in U.S. history where the winner lost the popular vote
but won the electoral vote (the fifth was in 2016). The losing side was disappointed but accepted the
decision of the courts, and the general populace agreed to support the new president. Rule of law had
won. There are many contrary examples around the world of disputed elections with violent and
contested outcomes that demonstrate the importance of rule of law in maintaining liberty.

The second principle of liberty is a balance between freedom and restraint. The majority who honor and
uphold the rule of law must impose some restraint through written laws on those in society who willfully
ignore basic rules of right and wrong. Most people, at one time or another, must be deterred by law from
harming someone or compelled to certain duties by the dictates of written laws. Without laws, few would
be willing to serve jury duty or to abide by posted speed limits. However, most restraint in a free society
must be self-imposed, otherwise the majority will continue to enact more and more restraints through
written laws, and the people will lose their freedom because the written laws will become numerous and
oppressive. The importance of self-imposed restraint in society was stressed in a 2009 conference talk
entitled “Moral Discipline” by Elder D. Todd Christofferson:

“By ‘moral discipline,’ I mean self-discipline based on moral standards. Moral discipline is the
consistent exercise of agency to choose the right because it is right, even when it is hard. It rejects
the self-absorbed life in favor of developing character worthy of respect and true greatness
through Christlike service (see Mark 10:42–45). The root of the word discipline is shared by the
word disciple, suggesting to the mind the fact that conformity to the example and teachings of
Jesus Christ is the ideal discipline that, coupled with His grace, forms a virtuous and morally
excellent person… “The societies in which many of us live have for more than a generation failed
to foster moral discipline. They have taught that truth is relative and that everyone decides for
himself or herself what is right. Concepts such as sin and wrong have been condemned as “value
judgments.” As the Lord describes it, “Every man walketh in his own way, and after the image of
his own god” (D&C 1:16).

“As a consequence, self-discipline has eroded and societies are left to try to maintain order and
civility by compulsion. The lack of internal control by individuals breeds external control by
governments…

“‘Policemen and laws can never replace customs, traditions and moral values as a means for
regulatin g human behavior.” At best, the police and criminal justice system are the last desperate

43


line of defense for a civilized society. Our increased reliance on laws to regulate behavior is a
measure of how uncivilized we’ve become.’

“In most of the world, we have been experiencing an extended and devastating economic
recession. It was brought on by multiple causes, but one of the major causes was widespread
dishonest and unethical conduct, particularly in the U.S. housing and financial markets.

Reactions have focused on enacting more and stronger regulation. Perhaps that may dissuade some
from unprincipled conduct, but others will simply get more creative in their circumvention. There could
never be enough rules so finely crafted as to anticipate and cover every situation, and even if there were,
enforcement would be impossibly expensive and burdensome. This approach leads to diminished
freedom for everyone. In the memorable phrase of Bishop Fulton J. Sheen, ‘We would not accept the yoke
of Christ; so now we mus t tremble at the yoke of Caesar.’

“In the end, it is only an internal moral compass in each individual that can effectively deal with the
root causes as well as the symptoms of societal decay. Societies will struggle in vain to establish
the common good until sin is denounced as sin and moral discipline takes its place in the
pantheon of civic virtues.

“Moral discipline is learned at home. While we cannot control what others may or may not do, the
Latter-day Saints can certainly stand with those who demonstrate virtue in their own lives and
inculcate virtue in the rising generation.”

As Elder Christofferson highlights, the third principle of liberty is that members of society must conduct
their public and private activities in a spirit of honesty, fairness, equity, and justice. Without this, people
lose faith in society, and the system of government will become less stable, factions will arise as different
groups attempt to protect themselves, divisiveness will increase, and eventually the system of
government will collapse as mutual trust and respect is destroyed.

We, as members of the Church, have a special obligation to follow the rule of law, to understand the
connection between natural law and inalienable rights, and to support liberty. Marion G. Romney, an
apostle of the Church, gave a First Presidency message in 1973 entitled “The Rule of Law.” He argued that
members of the Church were uniquely blessed to “be assured by the revealed word of God that there will
be no capriciousness in the world to come; that the rule of law is irrevocable; that every soul will be
rewarded according to the law he has obeyed; … that judgment will be mercifully administered, but that it
will be administered pursuant to law, and that it will not rob justice. Not only are Latter-day Saints
blessed by having this knowledge …; they are twice blessed by having both a knowledge and an
understanding of the laws by which they are to be judged. … Latter-day Saints should strictly obey the
laws of the government in which they live. By o ur own declaration of faith we are committed to do so…

44


When the ‘rule of law’ breaks down in a family, a community, a state, or a nation, chaos reigns. … A Latter-
day Saint should strictly obey every law of God, including the constitutional laws of the land in which he
lives, and do it with a good and honest heart.”

When liberty reigns, supported by an understanding of natural law and unalienable rights, a government
built on virtue and self-restraint is successful. Laws are made with the consent and knowledge of the
people, within the bounds of the authority granted by the people to the government. Laws are based on
the common good, on just and moral principles, and applied, enforced, and interpreted in a spirit of
firmness, fairness, and uniformity to all people equally. The balance between tyranny and anarchy is
maintained through republican and democratic principles. This is the ideal type of government that the
patriot philosophers developed and espoused during this time period.

As the founders developed these ideals and principles, they began to contrast their ideas with their
experience of British colonial governance, especially after the broad changes that were made after the
French and Indian War. This helped provide strong arguments against intrusive British policies, and
demonstrated how the mother country had failed the colonists and began to change the appeal from
rights as British subjects in favor of unalienable rights under natural law. It provided the rhetorical and
intellectual ammunition they needed to convince others of the justness of their rebellion (a powerful
evolution that you can examine in the documents that follow). And these ideals eventually provided the
foundations for the constitutional government they created after winning independence.

The Road to Revolution

The following documents demonstrate the
continuing discourse and evolution of
political ideals in this period following the
end of the French and Indian War until the
outbreak of hostilities in 1775, and the
growing attachment to these first principles
as espoused by the patriot philosophers.

The first document is the result of a meeting
of delegates from nine of the thirteen
colonies to lodge a formal protest of the
Stamp Act. They met in New York in 1765 and
adopted a series of resolutions protesting
this new and direct tax on the colonies. Note
the conciliatory tone of this document, and the rights and privileges to which they appeal.

45


Resolution of the Stamp Act Congress, October 19, 1765

The members of this Congress, sincerely devoted, with the warmest sentiments of affection and duty to
His Majesty's Person and Government, inviolably attached to the present happy establishment of the
Protestant succession, and with minds deeply impressed by a sense of the present and impending
misfortunes of the British colonies on this continent; having considered as maturely as time will permit
the circumstances of the said colonies, esteem it our indispensable duty to make the following
declarations of our humble opinion, respecting the most essential rights and liberties of the colonists,
and of the grievances under which they labour, by reason of several late Acts of Parliament.

I. That His Majesty's subjects in these colonies, owe the same allegiance to the Crown of Great-Britain,
that is owing from his subjects born within the realm, and all due subordination to that august body the
Parliament of Great Britain.

II. That His Majesty's liege subjects in these colonies, are entitled to all the inherent rights and liberties of
his natural born subjects within the kingdom of Great-Britain.

III. That it is inseparably essential to the freedom of a people, and the undoubted right of Englishmen,
that no taxes be imposed on them, but with their own consent, given personally, or by their
representatives.

IV. That the people of these colonies are not, and from their local circumstances cannot be, represented
in the House of Commons in Great-Britain.

V. That the only representatives of the people of these colonies, are persons chosen therein by
themselves, and that no taxes ever have been, or can be constitutionally imposed on them, but by their
respective legislatures.

VI. That all supplies to the Crown, being free gifts of the people, it is unreasonable and inconsistent with
the principles and spirit of the British Constitution, for the people of Great- Britain to grant to His Majesty
the property of the colonists.

VII. That trial by jury is the inherent and invaluable right of every British subject in these colonies.

VIII. That the late Act of Parliament, entitled, An Act for granting and applying certain Stamp Duties, and
other Duties, in the British colonies and plantations in America, etc., by imposing taxes on the inhabitants
of these colonies, and the said Act, and several other Acts, by extending the jurisdiction of the courts of
Admiralty beyond its ancient limits, have a manifest tendency to subvert the rights and liberties of the
colonists.

46


IX. That the duties imposed by several late Acts of Parliament, from the peculiar circumstances of these
colonies, will be extremely burthensome and grievous; and from the scarcity of specie, the payment of
them absolutely impracticable.

X. That as the profits of the trade of these colonies ultimately center in Great-Britain, to pay for the
manufactures which they are obliged to take from thence, they eventually contribute very largely to all
supplies granted there to the Crown.

XI. That the restrictions imposed by several late Acts of Parliament, on the trade of these colonies, will
render them unable to purchase the manufactures of Great-Britain.

XII. That the increase, prosperity, and happiness of these colonies, depend on the full and free enjoyment
of their rights and liberties, and an intercourse with Great-Britain mutually affectionate and
advantageous.

XIII. That it is the right of the British subjects in these colonies, to petition the King, Or either House of
Parliament.

Lastly, That it is the indispensable duty of these colonies, to the best of sovereigns, to the mother country,
and to themselves, to endeavour by a loyal and dutiful address to his Majesty, and humble applications to
both Houses of Parliament, to procure the repeal of the Act for granting and applying certain stamp
duties, of all clauses of any other Acts of Parliament, whereby the jurisdiction of the Admiralty is
extended as aforesaid, and of the other late Acts for the restriction of American commerce.

The Stamp Act was repealed, but Parliament reasserted its authority with the “Declaratory Act.” In
September of 1774, 55 delegates met in Philadelphia to discuss the Coercive Acts (named by the colonists
the “Intolerable Acts”) passed by Parliament in response to the Boston Tea Party. In addition to reviewing
colonial rights and demanding the repeal of specific acts of Parliament, note the constitutional arguments
that are beginning to loosen the allegiance between the colonies and Great Britain. It lists specific
grievances, a colonial bill of rights and the unanimous resolutions of the delegates. It is interesting to
note that the punitive actions taken mainly against Massachusetts brought the colonies together in a
“Continental Congress,” despite their vast cultural and economic differences.

Declaration and Resolves of the First Continental Congress, October
14, 1774

Whereas, since the close of the last war, the British Parliament, claiming a power, of right, to bind the
people of America by statutes in all cases whatsoever, hath, in some acts, expressly imposed taxes on
them, and in others, under various presences, but in fact for the purpose of raising a revenue, hath

47


imposed rates and duties payable in these colonies… And
whereas, in consequence of other statutes, judges, who
before held only estates at will in their offices, have been
made dependant on the crown alone for their salaries, and
standing armies kept in times of peace…

And whereas, in the last session of parliament, three
statutes were made; one entitled, "Anact to disco ntinue …
the landing and discharging, lading, or shipping of goods,
wares and merchandise, at the town, and within the harbour
of Boston …;" another entitled, "An act for the better
regulating the government of the province of
Massachusetts-Bay in New England;" and another entitled,
"An act for the impartial administration of justice … or for
the suppression of riots and tumults, in the province of the
Massachusetts-Bay in New England;" … All which statutes
are impolitic, unjust, and cruel, as well as unconstitutional,
and most dangerous and destructive of American rights:

And whereas, assemblies have been frequently dissolved, contrary to the rights of the people, when they
attempted to deliberate on grievances; and their dutiful, humble, loyal, and reasonable petitions to the
crown for redress, have been repeatedly treated with contempt, by his Majesty's ministers of state:

The good people of the several colonies … justly alarmed at these arbitrary proceedings of parliament
and administration, have severally elected, constituted, and appointed deputies to meet, and sit in
general Congress, in the city of Philadelphia, in order to obtain such establishment, as that their religion,
laws, and liberties, may not be subverted: Whereupon the deputies so appointed being now assembled,
in a full and free representation of these colonies, taking into their most serious consideration, the best
means of attaining the ends aforesaid, do, in the first place, as Englishmen, their ancestors in like cases
have usually done, for asserting and vindicating their rights and liberties, DECLARE,

That the inhabitants of the English colonies in North-America, by the immutable laws of nature, the
principles of the English constitution, and the several charters or compacts, have the following RIGHTS:
Resolved, 1. That they are entitled to life, liberty and property: and they have never ceded to any foreign
power whatever, a right to dispose of either without their consent.

Resolved, 2. That our ancestors, who first settled these colonies, were at the time of their emigration from
the mother country, entitled to all the rights, liberties, and immunities of free and natural- born subjects,
within the realm of England.

48


Resolved, 3. That by such emigration they by no means forfeited, surrendered, or lost any of those rights,
but that they were, and their descendants now are, entitled to the exercise and enjoyment of all such of
them, as their local and other circumstances enable them to exercise and enjoy.

Resolved, 4. That the foundation of English liberty, and of all free government, is a right in the people to
participate in their legislative council: and as the English colonists are not represented, and from their
local and other circumstances, cannot properly be represented in the British parliament, they are entitled
to a free and exclusive power of legislation in their several provincial legislatures, where their right of
representation can alone be preserved…

Resolved, 5. That the respective colonies are entitled to the common law of England, and more especially
to the great and inestimable privilege of being tried by their peers of the vicinage, according to the course
of that law.

Resolved, 6. That they are entitled to the benefit of such of the English statutes, as existed at the time of
their colonization; and which they have, by experience, respectively found to be applicable to their
several local and other circumstances.

Resolved, 7. That these, his Majesty's colonies, are likewise entitled to all the immunities and privileges
granted and confirmed to them by royal charters, or secured by their several codes of provincial laws.

Resolved, 8. That they have a right peaceably to assemble, consider of their grievances, and petition the
king; and that all prosecutions, prohibitory proclamations, and commitments for the same, are illegal.

Resolved, 9. That the keeping a standing army in these colonies, in times of peace, without the consent of
the legislature of that colony, in which such army is kept, is against law.

Resolved,10. It is indispensably necessary to good government, and rendered essential by the English
constitution, that the constituent branches of the legislature be independent of each other; that,
therefore, the exercise of legislative power in several colonies, by a council appointed, during pleasure, by
the crown, is unconstitutional, dangerous and destructive to the freedom of American legislation….

In the course of our inquiry, we find many infringements and violations of the foregoing rights, which,
from an ardent desire, that harmony and mutual intercourse of affection and interest may be restored,
we pass over for the present, and proceed to state such acts and measures as have been adopted since
the last war, which demonstrate a system formed to enslave America.

By the time the Second Continental Congress met in May, 1775, fighting had already begun. On April 19,
1775, the British army set out to seize and destroy the militia munitions being stored in Concord and to

49


arrest patriot leaders. Warned of their approach, riders from Boston awoke the countryside. The battles
at Lexington green and at the Concord bridge marked the first direct conflict between British troops and
colonial militia. This Declaration, largely the work of Thomas Jefferson and John Dickinson, was issued to
explain the reasons for armed resistance, arguing that British action had forced the colonists to choose
between submission to tyranny or resistance by force. Despite the battles already waged, this document
still expressed a desire for a peaceful settlement rather than separation and independence. The
delegates to the convention were narrowly divided between those who favored resistance to English
policies, and moderates who advocated conciliation.

Declaration of the Causes and Necessity of Taking Up Arms, July 6,
1775

If it was possible for men, who exercise their reason to believe, that the Divine Author of our existence
intended a part of the human race to hold an absolute property in, and an unbounded power over
others, marked out by his infinite goodness and wisdom, as the objects of a legal domination never
rightfully resistible, however severe and oppressive, the inhabitants of these colonies might at least
require from the parliament of Great-Britain some evidence, that this dreadful authority over them has
been granted to that body. But a reverence for our great Creator, principles of humanity, and the dictates
of common sense, must convince all those who reflect upon the subject, that government was instituted
to promote the welfare of man kind, and ought to be administered for the attainment of that end…

Our forefathers, inhabitants of the island of Great-Britain, left their native land, to seek on these shores a
residence for civil and religious freedom. At the expence of their blood, at the hazard of their fortunes,
without the least charge to the country from which they removed, by unceasing labour and an
unconquerable spirit, they effected settlements in the distant and inhospitable wilds of America, then
filled with numerous and warlike nations of barbarians. Societies or governments, vested with perfect
legislatures, were formed under charters from the crown, and an harmonious intercourse was
established between the colonies and the kingdom from which they derived their origin. The mutual
benefits of this union became in a short time so extraordinary, as to excite astonishment. … Towards the
conclusion of that [French and Indian] war, it pleased our sovereign to make a change in his counsels.—
From that fatal moment, the affairs of the British empire began to fall into confusion, and gradually
sliding from the summit of glorious prosperity, to which they had been advanced by the virtues and
abilities of one man, are at length distracted by the convulsions, that now shake it to its deepest
Foundations…

These devoted colonies were judged to be in such a state, as to present victories without bloodshed, and
all the easy emoluments of statuteable plunder.—The uninterrupted tenor of their peaceable and

50


respectful behaviour from the beginning of colonization, their dutiful, zealous, and useful services during
the war, though so recently and amply acknowledged in the most honorable manner by his majesty, by
the late king, and by parliament, could not save them from the meditated innovations.—Parliament was
influenced to adopt the pernicious project, and assuming a new power over them, have, in the course of
eleven years, given such decisive specimens of the spirit and consequences attending this power, as to
leave no doubt concerning the effects of acquiescence under it…

We are reduced to the alternative of chusing an unconditional submission to the tyranny of irritated
ministers, or resistance by force.—The latter is our choice.—We have counted the cost of this contest,
and find nothing so dreadful as voluntary slavery.—Honor, justice, and humanity, forbid us tamely to
surrender that freedom which we received from our gallant ancestors, and which our innocent posterity
have a right to receive from us. We cannot endure the infamy and guilt of resigning succeeding
generations to that wretchedness which inevitably awaits them, if we basely entail hereditary bondage
upon them.

Our cause is just. Our union is perfect. Our internal resources are great, and, if necessary, foreign
assistance is undoubtedly attainable.—We gratefully acknowledge, as signal instances of the Divine
favour towards us, that his Providence would not permit us to be called into this severe controversy, until
we were grown up to our present strength, had been previously exercised in warlike operation, and
possessed of the means of defending ourselves.—With hearts fortified with these animating reflections,
we most solemnly, before God and the world, declare, that, exerting the utmost energy of those powers,
which our beneficent Creator hath graciously bestowed upon us, the arms we have been compelled by
our enemies to assume, we will, in defiance of every hazard, with unabating firmness and perseverance,
employ for the preservation of our liberties; being with our [one] mind resolved to die free-men rather
than live slaves.

Lest this declaration should disquiet the minds of our friends and fellow-subjects in any part of the
empire, we assure them that we mean not to dissolve that union which has so long and so happily
subsisted between us, and which we sincerely wish to see restored.—Necessity has not yet driven us into
that desperate measure, or induced us to excite any other nation to war against them.—We have not
raised armies with ambitious designs of separating from Great Britain, and establishing independent
states. We fight not for glory or for conquest. We exhibit to mankind the remarkable spectacle of a people
attacked by unprovoked enemies, without any imputation or even suspicion of offence. They boast of
their privileges and civilization, and yet proffer no milder conditions than servitude or death.

In our own native land, in defence of the freedom that is our birth-right, and which we ever enjoyed till
the late violation of it—for the protection of our property, acquired solely by the honest industry of our
fore-fathers and ourselves, against violence actually offered, we have taken up arms. We shall lay them

51


down when hostilities shall cease on the part of the aggressors, and all danger of their being renewed
shall be removed, and not before.

With an humble confidence in the mercies of the supreme and impartial Judge and Ruler of the universe,
we most devoutly implore his divine goodness to protect us happily through this great conflict, to dispose
our adversaries to reconciliation on reasonable terms, and thereby to relieve the empire from the
calamities of civil war.

As these documents illustrate, over time the political and philosophical division between the colonies had
become wider, and the opportunity for reconciliation diminished. Still, the colonists were divided on this
question. It has been estimated that one-third of the colonists wanted independence, one-third wanted
to remain loyal to Great Britain, and another third were on the fence about the issue, wary of such a
revolutionary step and leaving the protection of the most powerful empire on earth.

Common Sense and the Declaration of Independence

At the critical moment, following the battles of Lexington and Concord and Bunker Hill but before
separation from England had been accepted, the case for American independence was clearly and
dramatically stated by Thomas Paine in his brilliant pamphlet Common Sense. It appeared early in 1776
and promptly sold more than 100,000 copies. Thomas Paine (1737–1809) came to America in 1774 after
some unsettled beginnings in England. He became an editor of the Pennsylvania Magazine and soon
became champion of the revolutionary cause and of the rights of the common man. He first published his
electrifying pamphlet, Common Sense, in January of 1776. His reasoned and impassioned plea for America
to separate itself from England went through four editions and was widely read by the 15 colonists. Even
Washington agreed that it wrought a “powerful change” on the minds of the colonists and had a great
impact on the movement toward independence. Paine ridiculed the idea that a continent ought to be
governed by an island, referred to the king as a “royal brute,” and concluded simply that “‘tis time to part.”
His language and tone made Common Sense accessible and interesting to readers of all social stations; his
argument that common tradesmen, mechanics, and farmers were as capable of governing as hereditary
monarchs set the common man on an equal footing with the political elite; and his indictment of the King
turned the colonists’ anger away from parliament to the monarch and made them all traitors to the
crown. Although Paine eventually fell out of favor with religionists and revolutionaries alike, he remains
one of the most quotable pamphleteers in American history.

52


Thomas Paine, Common Sense, 1776

Perhaps the sentiments contained in the following pages, are not yet sufficiently fashionable to procure them
general favor; a long habit of not thinking a thing wrong, gives it a superficial appearance of being right, and
raises at first a formidable outcry in defense of custom. But
the tumult soon subsides. Time makes more converts than
reason.

As a long and violent abuse of power, is generally the means
of calling the right of it in question … and as the King of
England hath undertaken in his own right, to support the
parliament in what he calls theirs, and as the good people of
this country are grievously oppressed by the combination,
they have an undoubted privilege to inquire into the
pretensions of both, and equally to reject the usurpation of
either…

… I know it is difficult to get over local or long standing
prejudices, yet if we will suffer ourselves to examine the
component parts of the English constitution, we shall find
them to be the base remains of two ancient tyrannies,
compounded with some new republican materials. First.—
The remains of monarchical tyranny in the person of the
king. Secondly.—The remains of aristocratical tyranny in the
persons of the peers. Thirdly.—The new republican
materials, in the persons of the Commons, on whose virtue
depends the freedom of England. …

To say that the constitution of England is a union of three powers reciprocally checking each
other, is farcical, either the words have no meaning, or they are flat contradictions....There is
something exceedingly ridiculous in the composition of monarchy; it first excludes a man from
the means of information, yet empowers him to act in cases where the highest judgment is
required. The state of a king shuts him from the world, yet the business of a king requires him to
know it thoroughly; wherefore the different parts, by unnaturally opposing and destroying each
other, prove the whole character to be absurd and useless.…

53


The prejudice of Englishmen, in favour of their own government by king, lords and commons,
arises as much or more from national pride than reason. Individuals are undoubtedly safer in
England than in some other countries, but the will of the king is as much the law of the land in
Britain as in France, with this difference, that instead of proceeding directly from his mouth, it is
handed to the people under the more formidable shape of an act of Parliament. …

Of Monarchy and Hereditary Succession

… [There is a] distinction for which no truly natural or religious reason can be assigned, and that
is, the distinction of men into kings and subjects. Male and female are the distinctions of nature,
good and bad the distinctions of heaven; but how a race of men came into the world so exalted
above the rest, and distinguished like some new species, is worth enquiring into, and whether
they are the means of happiness or of misery to mankind.

In the early ages of the world, according to the scripture chronology, there were no kings; the
consequence of which was there were no wars; it is the pride of kings which throw mankind into
confusion…

Government by kings was first introduced into the world by the heathens, from whom the
children of Israel copied the custom. It was the most prosperous invention the devil ever set on
foot for the promotion of idolatry. The heathens paid divine honors to their deceased kings, and
the Christian world hath improved on the plan by doing the same to their living ones. How
impious is the title of sacred majesty applied to a worm, who in the midst of his splendor is
crumbling into dust! As the exalting one man so greatly above the rest cannot be justified on the
equal rights of nature, so neither can it be defended on the authority of scripture; for the will of
the Almighty, as declared by Gideon and the prophet Samuel, expressly disapproves of
government by Kings.…

To the evil of monarchy we have added that of hereditary succession; … One of the strongest
natural proofs of the folly of hereditary right in kings, is, that nature disapproves it, otherwise
she would not so frequently turn it into ridicule by giving mankind an ass for a lion [a king].

… However, it is needless to spend much time in exposing the folly of hereditary right; if there are
any so weak as to believe it, let them promiscuously worship the ass and lion, and welcome. I
shall neither copy their humility, nor disturb their devotion…

In short, monarchy and succession have laid (not this or that kingdom only) but the world in
blood and ashes. ‘Tis a form of government wh ich the word of God bears testimony against, and
blood will attend it.

54


… In absolute monarchies the whole weight of business, civil and military, lies on the king; the
children of Israel in their request for a king, urged this plea “that he may judge us, and go out
before us and fight our battles.” But in countries where he is neither a judge nor a general, as in
England, a man would be puzzled to know what is his business.

The nearer any government approaches to a republic the less business there is for a king. It is
somewhat difficult to find a proper name for the government of England. Sir William Meredith
calls it a republic; but in its present state it is unworthy of the name, because the corrupt
influence of the crown, by having all the places in its disposal, hath so effectually swallowed up
the power, and eaten out the virtue of the House of Commons (the republican part in the
constitution) that the government of England is nearly as monarchical as that of France or
Spain…

In England a king hath little more to do than to make war and give away places; which in plain
terms, is to impoverish the nation and set it together by the ears. A pretty business indeed for a
man to be allowed eight hundred thousand sterling a year for, and worshipped into the bargain!
Of more worth is one honest man to society and in the sight of God, than all the crowned
ruffians that ever lived.

Thoughts on the Present State of American Affairs.

In the following pages I offer nothing more than simple facts, plain arguments, and common
sense; and have no other preliminaries to settle with the reader, than that he will divest himself
of prejudice and prepossession, and suffer his reason and his feelings to determine for
themselves; that he will put on, or rather that he will not put off, the true character of a man,and
generously enlarge his views beyond the present day. Volumes have been written on the subject
of the struggle between England and America. Men of all ranks have embarked in the
controversy, from different motives, and with various designs; but all have been ineffectual, and
the period of debate is closed…

The sun never shined on a cause of greater worth. ‘Tis not the affair of a city, a country, a province, or a
kingdom, but of a continent—of at least one eighth part of the habitable globe.

‘Tis not the concern of a day, a year, or an age; posterity are virtually involved in the contest, and will be
more or less affected, even to the end of time, by the proceedings now. Now is the seed time of
continental union, faith and honor. The least fracture now will be like a name engraved with the point of
a pin on the tender rind of a young oak; the wound will enlarge with the tree, and posterity read it in full
grown characters.

55


By referring the matter from argument to arms, a new era for politics is struck; a new method of
thinking hath arisen…

As much hath been said of the advantages of reconciliation, which, like an agreeable dream, hath
passed away and left us as we were, it is but right, that we should examine the contrary side of the
argument, and inquire into some of
the many material injuries which
these colonies sustain, and always will
sustain, by being connected with, and
dependent on Great-Britain.
To examine that connection and
dependance, on the principles of
nature and common sense, to see
what we have to trust to, if separated,
and what we are to expect, if
dependent.

I have heard it asserted by some, that
as America hath flourished under her
former connection with Great-Britain,
that the same connection is necessary towards her future happiness, and will always have the same
effect. Nothing can be more fallacious than this kind of argument. … America would have flourished as
much, and probably much more, had no European power had any thing to do with her. The commerce,
by which she hath enriched herself are the necessaries of life, and will always have a market while
eating is the custom of Europe. But she has protected us, say some. That she has engrossed us is true,
and defended the continent at our expense as well as her own is admitted, and she would have
defended Turkey from the same motive, viz. the sake of trade and dominion.

…We have boasted the protection of Great-Britain, without considering, that her motive was interest not
attachment; that she did not protect us from our enemies on our account, but from her enemies on her
own account, from those who had no quarrel with us on any other account… But Britain is the parent
country, say some. Then the more shame upon her conduct. Even brutes do not devour their young, nor
savages make war upon their families; wherefore the assertion, if true, turns to her reproach; … Europe,
and not England, is the parent country of America. This new world hath been the asylum for the
persecuted lovers of civil and religious liberty from every part of Europe. Hither have they fled, not from
the tender embraces of the mother, but from the cruelty of the monster; and it is so far true of England,
that the same tyranny which drove the first emigrants from home, pursues their descendants still.

56


…Reconciliation is now a fallacious dream. Nature hath deserted the connection, and art cannot supply
her place. For, as Milton wisely expresses, “never can true reconcilement grow where wounds of deadly
hate have pierced so deep.” A government of our own is our natural right: And when a man seriously
reflects on the precariousness of human affairs, he will become convinced, that it is infinitely wiser and
safer, to form a constitution of our own in a cool deliberate manner, while we have it in our power, than
to trust such an interesting event to time and chance. … The Almighty hath implanted in us these
unextinguishable feelings for good and wise purposes. They are the guardians of his image in our
hearts. They distinguish us from the herd of common animals. The social compact would dissolve, and
justice be extirpated [from] the earth, or have only a casual existence were we callous to the touches of
affection…O ye that love mankind! Ye that dare oppose, not only the tyranny, but the tyrant, stand forth!
Every spot of the old world is overrun with oppression. Freedom hath been hunted round the globe.
Asia, and Africa, have long expelled her—Europe regards her like a stranger, and England hath given her
warning to depart. O! receive the fugitive, and prepare in time an asylum for mankind.

After Paine’s writing of Common Sense, the mood in the colonies turned even more decidedly away
from conciliation with England and toward independence.

On June 7, 1776, Richard Henry Lee of Virginia introduced a resolution into the Second Continental
Congress stating “That these United Colonies are, and of right ought to be, free and independent
States.” The Congress appointed a committee including Thomas Jefferson, John Adams, and
Benjamin Franklin to draft a declaration of independence. Thomas Jefferson was chosen to write
the document. Lee’s motion was approved on July 2, and Jefferson’s declaration, after significant
debate and several changes in the wording, especially in the area of Jefferson’s attempt to limit
slavery, was given final approval on July 4.

Jefferson’s Declaration of Independence is structured much like what would be expected in a
typical five-paragraph essay. He begins with two paragraphs where he not only sets forth his
purpose to declare independence, but also explains why such a step was necessary. In the middle
section of the Declaration, Jefferson provided specific evidence of England’s violation of the
unalienable rights of the colonists. If this section is read carefully, it is possible to see the history of
the declining relationship between England and the colonies between 1763 and 1776. (Notice in
this section that in keeping with Paine’s pattern, Jefferson’s focus is on the king and not
Parliament.) Finally, Jefferson concludes by restating the purpose of the Declaration and
demonstrating the commitment of the signers to the cause of independence. Jefferson later said
that his purpose in writing the Declaration was not to create something entirely new, but to put
down on paper the mind and will of the American people. That is why so many of the words and
phrases included in the Declaration were also found in the writings of others.

57


Declaration of Independence, 1776

When in the course of human events, it becomes necessary for one people to dissolve the political
bands which have connected them with another, and to assume among the powers of the earth,
the separate and equal station to which the laws of nature and of nature’s God entitle them, a
decent respect to the opinions of mankind requires that they should declare the causes which
impel them to the separation.

We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by
their Creator with certain unalienable rights; that among these are life, liberty and the pursuit of
happiness.—That to secure these rights, governments are instituted among men, deriving their
just powers from the consent of the governed,—that whenever any form of government becomes
destructive of these ends, it is the right of the people to alter or to abolish it, and to institute new
government, laying its foundation on such principles and organizing its powers in such form, as to
them shall seem most likely to affect their safety and happiness.

Prudence, indeed, will dictate that governments long established should not be changed for light
and transient causes; and accordingly all experience hath shewn, that mankind are more disposed
to suffer, while evils are sufferable, than to right themselves by abolishing the forms to which they
are accustomed. But when a long train of abuses and usurpations, pursuing invariably the same
object evinces a design to reduce them under absolute despotism, it is their right, it is their duty,
to throw off such government, and to provide new guards for their future security.—Such has
been the patient sufferance of these colonies; and such is now the necessity which constrains
them to alter their former systems of government. The history of the present King of Great Britain
is a history of repeated injuries and usurpations, all having in direct object the establishment of an
absolute tyranny over these States. To prove this, let facts be submitted to a candid world.

He has refused his assent to laws, the most wholesome and necessary for the public good. He has
forbidden his governors to pass laws of immediate and pressing importance, unless suspended in
their operation till his assent should be obtained; and when so suspended, he has utterly
neglected to attend to them.

He has refused to pass other laws for the accommodation of large districts of people, unless those
people would relinquish the right of representation in the legislature, a right inestimable to them
and formidable to tyrants only. He has called together legislative bodies at places unusual,
uncomfortable, and distant from the depository of their public records, for the sole purpose of

58


fatiguing them into compliance with his measures. He has dissolved representative houses
repeatedly, for opposing with manly firmness his invasions on the rights of the people.

He has refused for a long time, after such dissolutions, to cause others to be elected; whereby the
legislative powers, incapable of annihilation, have returned to the people at large for their
exercise; the state remaining in the mean time exposed to all the dangers of invasion from
without, and convulsions within.

He has endeavoured to prevent the population of these States; for that purpose obstructing the
laws for naturalization of foreigners; refusing to pass others to encourage their migrations hither,
and raising the conditions of new appropriations of lands.

He has obstructed the administration of justice, by refusing his assent to laws for establishing
judiciary powers.

He has made judges dependent on his will alone, for the tenure of their offices, and the amount
and payment of their salaries.

He has erected a multitude of new offices, and sent hither swarms of officers to harrass our
people, and eat out their substance.

He has kept among us, in times of peace, standing armies without the consent of our legislatures.

He has affected to render the military independent of and superior to the civil power. He has
combined with others to subject us to a jurisdiction foreign to our Constitution, and
unacknowledged by our laws; giving his assent to their acts of pretended legislation:

For quartering large bodies of armed troops among us: For protecting them, by a mock trial, from
punishment for any murders which they should commit on the inhabitants of these States:

For depriving us in many cases, of the benefits of trial by jury: For transporting us beyond seas to
be tried for pretended offences: For abolishing the free system of English laws in a neighbouring
province, establishing therein an arbitrary government, and enlarging its boundaries so as to
render it at once an example and fit instrument for introducing the same absolute rule into these
colonies:

For taking away our charters, abolishing our most valuable laws, and altering fundamentally the
forms of our governments:

For suspending our own legislatures, and declaring themselves invested with power to legislate
for us in all cases whatsoever.

59


He has abdicated government here, by declaring us out of his protection and waging war against
us.

He has plundered our seas, ravaged our coasts, burnt our towns, and destroyed the lives of our
people.

He is at this time transporting large armies of foreign mercenaries to complete the works of death,
desolation and tyranny, already begun with circumstances of cruelty and perfidy scarcely
paralleled in the most barbarous ages, and totally unworthy the head of a civilized nation.

He has constrained our fellow citizens taken captive on the high seas to bear arms against their
country, to become the executioners of their friends and brethren, or to fall themselves by their
hands.

He has excited domestic insurrections amongst us, and has endeavoured to bring on the
inhabitants of our frontiers, the merciless Indian savages, whose known rule of warfare, is an
undistinguished destruction of all ages, sexes and conditions.

In every stage of these oppressions we have petitioned for redress in the most humble terms: our
repeated petitions have been answered only by repeated injury. A prince whose character is thus
marked by every act which may define a tyrant, is unfit to be the ruler of a free people.

Nor have we been wanting in attentions to our Brittish brethren. We have warned them from time
to time of attempts by their legislature to extend an unwarrantable jurisdiction over us. We have
reminded them of the circumstances of our emigration and settlement here. We have appealed to
their native justice and magnanimity, and we have conjured them by the ties of our common
kindred to disavow these usurpations, which, would inevitably interrupt our connections and
correspondence. They too have been deaf to the voice of justice and of consanguinity. We must,
therefore, acquiesce in the necessity, which denounces our separation, and hold them, as we hold
the rest of mankind, enemies in war, in peace friends.

We, therefore, the representatives of the United States of America, in general congress,
assembled, appealing to the Supreme Judge of the world for the rectitude of our intentions, do, in
the name, and by authority of the good people of these colonies, solemnly publish and declare,
that these united colonies are, and of right ought to be free and independent states; that they are
absolved from all allegiance to the British Crown, and that all political connection between them
and the state of Great Britain, is and ought to be totally dissolved; and that as free and
independent states, they have full power to levy war, conclude peace, contract alliances, establish
commerce, and to do all other acts and things which independent states may of right do.

60


And for the support of this declaration, with a firm reliance on the protection of Divine Providence,
we mutually pledge to each other our lives, our fortunes and our sacred honor.

Following the Declaration of Independence, the battles that began with Lexington and Concord
became part of the war for independence. The Revolutionary War was fought from 1775 until
1783. For most patriots, it seemed evident that the American people had risen to the highest
pinnacle of public virtue by laying their lives on the line for principles rather than an actual threat
to life or property. They spoke openly of the people’s virtue and the “spirit of the revolution.” For
others, especially those who remained loyal to the King, it seemed obvious that Americans could
also become mean-spirited and vengeful if circumstances invited such behavior. Americans were
deeply divided during the War: about one-third were committed revolutionaries, about one-third
remained loyal to the King, and about one-third could go either way.

It seemed unlikely when the war began that Americans could actually defeat the British. George
Washington’s recognition that the war could only be lost if England defeated the army, coupled
with his ability to retreat so well, and sprinkled with a few strategic victories, allowed the war to
continue until the British finally capitulated. Significant, too, was the victory at Saratoga that
convinced the French to declare war on England as an ally of the American cause, and the victory
at Yorktown where the efficacy of that alliance was clearly demonstrated. After a long and bitter
struggle over eight years between American and British forces and between neighbors and former
friends in communities throughout America, the colonies officially separated from England
through the signing of the Treaty of Paris in 1783. Among other things, the Treaty of Paris granted
independence to the thirteen American states and granted to them all of the territory east of the
Mississippi River.