Week 11: The Democratization of America
The founders made some important distinctions between “republican principles” and the “democratic 
spirit.” Republican principles, or the idea that people should participate in civic affairs so that the 
government will act for the common well-being of the people, were considered good and the basis of any 
government that protected the people’s interests. Political participation has been an issue since the 
beginning of the United States—indeed, since before the forming of the United States (“No taxation 
without representation”).The democratic spirit, on the other hand, was somewhat feared by the 
philosophers because of its susceptibility to passion and factional divisions. The framers of the 
Constitution built in many protections against the idea of direct democracy. Originally senators were 
appointed by state legislators - not elected by the people. The electoral college is another way that the 
electing of the president was insulated from the popular vote.
This fear of excessive democracy, factions and political parties, and the divisiveness that might threaten 
the new republic are evident in the address delivered by George Washington at the end of his two terms 
as president in 1796. He warned against both geographical divisions, created by the coming together of 
very different states, as well as the challenges of the “Spirit of Party” which he believed must have limited 
influence for a republic to survive.
Farewell Address - President George Washington, 1796
In contemplating the causes which may disturb our Union, it occurs as matter of serious concern that 
any ground should have been furnished for characterizing parties by geographical discriminations 
Northern and Southern, Atlantic and Western; whence designing men may endeavor to excite a belief, 
that there is a real difference of local interests and views. One of the expedients of Party to acquire 
influence, within particular districts, is to misrepresent the opinions and aims of other districts. You 
cannot shield yourselves too much against the jealousies and heart burnings which spring from these 
misrepresentations. To the efficacy and permanency of your Union, a Government for the whole is 
indispensable.
No alliances, however strict between the parts can be an adequate substitute. They must inevitably 
experience the infractions and interruptions which all alliances in all times have experienced. Sensible of 
this momentous truth, you have improved upon your first essay, by the adoption of a Constitution of 
Government, better calculated than your former for an intimate
Union, and for the efficacious management of your common concerns. This government, the offspring of 
our own choice uninfluenced and unawed, adopted upon full investigation and mature deliberation, 
222

completely free in its principles, in the distribution of its powers, uniting security with energy, and 
containing within itself a provision for its own amendment, has a just claim to your confidence and your 
support. Respect for its authority, compliance with its Laws, acquiescence in its measures, are duties 
enjoined by the fundamental maxims of true Liberty. . . .
I have already intimated to you the danger of parties in the State, with particular reference to the 
founding of them on Geographical discriminations.
Let me now take a more comprehensive view, and warn you in the most solemn manner against the 
baneful effects of the Spirit of Party, generally. This Spirit, unfortunately, is inseparable from our nature, 
having its root in the strongest passions of the human mind. It exists under different shapes in all 
Governments, more or less stifled, controlled, or repressed; but, in those of the popular form, it is seen 
in its greatest rankness, and is truly their worst enemy...
Without looking forward to an extremity of this kind, (which nevertheless ought not to be entirely out of 
sight), the common and continual mischiefs of the spirit of Party are sufficient to make it the interest 
and duty of a wise people to discourage and restrain it. It serves always to distract the Public Councils, 
and enfeeble the Public administration. It agitates the community with ill- founded jealousies and false 
alarms, kindles the animosity of one part against another, foments occasionally riot and insurrection. It 
opens the door to foreign influence and corruption, which find a facilitated access to the Government 
itself through the channels of party passions.
Thus the policy and the will of one country, are subjected to the policy and will of another.
There is an opinion, that parties in free countries are useful checks upon the Administration of the 
Government, and serve to keep alive the spirit of Liberty. This within certain limits is probably true.
But in those [governments] of the popular character, in
Governments purely elective, it is a Spirit not to be encouraged. . . .
It was hoped that a well-regulated republic would avoid the excesses of democracy and the 
“democratic spirit.” But the country’s founders espoused principles which could not help but bring a 
desire for greater and greater public (democratic) participation in the processes of governing. This has 
led to the “democratization” of the American government. This term democratization does not mean 
that America has changed from a republic to a democracy in form of government, but it does mean 
that over time processes have evolved that include rather than exclude more and more people in the 
operation of government. The increasing commitment to this “democratic spirit” has been an 
important part of American political culture.
223

The growth of the political community, beyond the framers original construction, is an important 
aspect of this democratization. The idea contained in the Declaration of Independence - “all men are 
created equal” - has expanded to take on a more literal meaning beyond propertied white males; all 
are equal to participate in their government and try to influence its policies.
The Expansion of Suffrage
This is particularly reflected in the expansion of voting rights. The 
Constitution stipulated no significant barriers to participation for 
any citizen of the United States, as voter qualifications were left for 
the states to decide. In the 1790s, suffrage, or the right to vote was 
limited to land- owning (generally defined as fifty acres) white males 
of at least twenty-one years of age. By the 1830s, the practice of 
“universal manhood suffrage” allowed any white male to vote, 
regardless of whether or not he owned land.
This expansion of the political community in the early republic did 
not include women.
Even as far back as the Revolution, the language of liberty and 
freedom caused some to question whether women could and 
should be included in the rhetoric. As Abigail Adams wrote her 
husband John Adams in the spring of 1776:
“I long to hear that you have declared an independency—and by the 
way in the new Code of Laws which I suppose it will be necessary for you to make I desire you would 
Remember the Ladies, and be more generous and favorable to them than your ancestors. Do not put 
such unlimited power into the hands of the Husbands.
Remember all Men would be tyrants if they could. If particular care and attention is not paid to the 
Ladies we are determined to foment a rebellion, and will not hold ourselves bound by any Laws in which 
we have no voice, or Representation.”
The first stirrings of the battle for women’s suffrage came as part of the abolitionist movement to end 
slavery. Many of its leaders were women, leading the moral charge against the labor practice. These 
abolitionists came to see the oppression of African-Americans and the oppression of women as linked in 
their common lack of economic and political power. Both groups had limited access to education, and 
224

neither could own property or vote. In 1848, in Seneca Falls, New York, the first Women’s Rights 
Convention was held. The meeting drafted a document that mirrored the language of the Declaration of 
Independence and used its structure as the model. It demanded that the women be acknowledged as 
right-bearing individuals and respected by society.
The Declaration of Sentiments - 1848
When, in the course of human events, it becomes necessary for one portion of the family of man to 
assume among the people of the earth a position different from that which they have hitherto occupied, 
but one to which the laws of nature and of nature's God entitle them, a decent respect to the opinions of 
mankind requires that they should declare the causes that impel them to such a course.
We hold these truths to be self-evident: that all men and women are created equal; that they are 
endowed by their Creator with certain inalienable rights; that among these are life, liberty, and the 
pursuit of happiness; that to secure these rights governments are instituted, deriving their just powers 
from the consent of the governed. Whenever any form of government becomes destructive of these ends, 
it is the right of those who suffer from it to refuse allegiance to it, and to insist upon the institution of a 
new government, laying its foundation on such principles, and organizing its powers in such form, as to 
them shall seem most likely to effect their safety and happiness. Prudence, indeed, will dictate that 
governments long established should not be changed for light and transient causes; and accordingly all 
experience hath shown that mankind are more disposed to suffer. while evils are sufferable, than to 
right themselves by abolishing the forms to which they are accustomed. But when a long train of abuses 
and usurpations, pursuing invariably the same object, evinces a design to reduce them under absolute 
despotism, it is their duty to throw off such government, and to provide new guards for their future 
security. Such has been the patient sufferance of the women under this government, and such is now 
the necessity which constrains them to demand the equal station to which they are entitled. The history 
of mankind is a history of repeated injuries and usurpations on the part of man toward woman, having 
in direct object the establishment of an absolute tyranny over her. To prove this, let facts be submitted 
to a candid world.
He has never permitted her to exercise her inalienable right to the elective franchise. He has compelled 
her to submit to laws, in the formation of which she had no voice.
He has withheld from her rights which are given to the most ignorant and degraded men--both natives 
and foreigners.
Having deprived her of this first right of a citizen, the elective franchise, thereby leaving her without 
representation in the halls of legislation, he has oppressed her on all sides.
225

He has made her, if married, in the eye of the law, civilly dead.
He has taken from her all right in property, even to the wages she earns.
He has made her, morally, an irresponsible being, as she can commit many crimes with impunity, 
provided they be done in the presence of her husband. In the covenant of marriage, she is compelled to 
promise obedience to her husband, he becoming, to all intents and purposes, her master--the law giving 
him power to deprive her of her liberty, and to administer chastisement.
He has so framed the laws of divorce, as to what shall be the proper causes, and in case of separation, 
to whom the guardianship of the children shall be given, as to be wholly regardless of the happiness of 
women--the law, in all cases, going upon a false supposition of the supremacy of man, and giving all 
power into his hands.
After depriving her of all rights as a married woman, if single, and the owner of property, he has taxed 
her to support a government which recognizes her only when her property can be made profitable to it.
He has monopolized nearly all the profitable employments, and from those she is permitted to follow, 
she receives but a scanty remuneration. He closes against her all the avenues to wealth and distinction 
which he considers most honorable to himself. As a teacher of theology, medicine, or law, she is not 
known.
He has denied her the facilities for obtaining a thorough education, all colleges being closed against her.
He allows her in church, as well as state, but a subordinate position, claiming apostolic authority for her 
exclusion from the ministry, and, with some exceptions, from any public participation in the affairs of 
the church.
He has created a false public sentiment by giving to the world a different code of morals for men and 
women, by which moral delinquencies which exclude women from society, are not only tolerated, but 
deemed of little account in man.
He has usurped the prerogative of Jehovah himself, claiming it as his right to assign for her a sphere of 
action, when that belongs to her conscience and to her God.
He has endeavored, in every way that he could, to destroy her confidence in her own powers, to lessen 
her self-respect, and to make her willing to lead a dependent and abject life.
Now, in view of this entire disfranchisement of one-half the people of this country, their social and 
religious degradation--in view of the unjust laws above mentioned, and because women do feel 
themselves aggrieved, oppressed, and fraudulently deprived of their most sacred rights, we insist that 
226

they have immediate admission to all the rights and privileges which belong to them as citizens of the 
United States.
After the Civil War, the women’s suffrage movement faced many setbacks and divisions. The passage of 
the 14th amendment, while a victory for abolitionists, defined citizenship as “male,” adding that word to 
the constitution for the first time. Women, it was argued, were less intelligent and less able to make 
political decisions than men. Men could represent their wives better than the wives could represent 
themselves, women’s participation in politics would lead to the end of family life, and some argued there 
were too many voters already. And for women’s suffrage to succeed, men would have to be convinced to 
vote for it.
The campaign became a state by state battle, and western states, wishing to attract settlers, were the first 
to allow women to vote. Suffragists countered the opposition with the idea that women would elevate 
politics, increase the power of the male voters in their families, and protect their homes and children with 
their vote. In the early twentieth century, it became a Progressive reform, tied to ideas about reducing 
political corruption and increasing the power of the middle class. Finally, in the wake of World War I, the 
19th amendment became law in 1920.
In the 20th century, the expansion of suffrage continued. When Native American tribes were given 
reservation lands, tribes were also made sovereign (self-governing) nations, and the 14th amendment 
was interpreted as not applying to Native peoples. As a result, many Native Americans were not 
considered citizens, and therefore not allowed to vote in federal elections. After thousands of Native 
Americans fought for the United States during World War I, the push came for the Indian Citizenship Act 
of 1924, which granted Native Americans full U.S. citizenship in addition to their tribal membership. 
However, the Constitution leaves it up to the individual states to decide who has the right to vote in each 
state.
227

Some states allowed Native Americans the vote right away, while others took decades to grant that right. 
Some states claimed that because the 
Native Americans lived on reservations as 
"separate nations,” they were not 
technically residents of the state. The last 
state to grant suffrage to Native Americans 
was New Mexico in 1962. In some places 
they still struggled with being able to 
exercise the vote because of poll taxes, 
literacy tests, and other barriers, but with 
subsequent legislation, voting protections 
have been reaffirmed. Mail-in voting, 
language barriers, and distance to polls 
still cause voting challenges to some Native 
Americans in certain areas of the country.
The Voting Rights Act of 1965 eliminated 
poll taxes and literacy requirements that 
had been created during Reconstruction to limit African-American voting in the South. During the 
Vietnam War era, as millions of young men were drafted to fight in Southeast Asia, many argued that the 
voting age should be lowered, and with the 26th Amendment the voting age was lowered to eighteen. 
Finally, in the 1980s long state residency requirements were eliminated, completing the broadest voting 
base the United States has had in over 200 years.
The Power of Political Parties 
Despite Washington’s warnings, organized political parties became an integral part of the system of 
government in the early years of the republic. Political parties developed as a natural outgrowth of 
freedom, as like-minded people exercised their right to assemble, to petition the government to promote 
their interests and beliefs, and rally behind candidates who would push forward their agenda. Many of 
the early political battles echoed many of the controversies discussed during the Constitutional 
Convention.
1790–1828 (The First Party System)
The first political parties, the Federalists and the Democratic Republicans, were relatively weak and were 
certainly not as entrenched in the political process as today’s parties, but they did provide an opportunity 
for party leaders to motivate popular action and party supporters to become more active in the political 
228

process. The Federalists were led by Alexander Hamilton and John Adams, but should not be confused 
with the group of the same name that favored ratification of the Constitution. The Federalists of this time 
period believed in a strong central government, a loose interpretation of the Constitution, and an 
America strong in finance and industry. Alexander Hamilton fully believed that government should be led 
by a “privileged class” because the “illiterate masses” could not be trusted to make important decisions. 
Hamilton felt these decisions should be left to the “ruling elite,” who would earn their position by merit 
and not by heredity. The Democratic Republicans were led by Thomas Jefferson and James Madison. They 
believed in strong state government, a strict interpretation of the Constitution, an America based on an 
agricultural economy, and government by the common man who could be trusted with the decisions of 
the republic.
With the election of 1800 came a moment of truth for the United States. Democratic Republican Thomas 
Jefferson beat out Federalist President John Adams for the presidency. It was the first time in the 
country’s short history that power had changed parties, but despite the bitterly divided contest, the 
transition of power was peaceful. Thomas Jefferson called this the “Revolution of 1800.” This precedent 
set the stage for the political “battles” between parties that continues today, as each side agrees to the 
rule of law and does not attempt to subvert the election outcome. This precedent was somewhat 
damaged in 2020. 
1828–1860 (The Second Party System)
During this time parties became seen as a normal and important part of political tradition and the 
organization of government, with voters developing strong loyalties to certain parties. With the advent of 
universal manhood suffrage came the rise of the popular spirit of mass participation, where “elite” and 
“common” alike involved themselves in the workings of government. States did away with property 
requirements for voting, despite opposition from some who feared the expansion of the electorate.
Andrew Jackson created the Democratic Party to work for his presidential election in 1828 and 
symbolized the rise of the “common man.” His party advocated strong state governments and strict 
constitutional constructionism which favored state supremacy. His main opposition was the Whigs, led by 
John Quincy Adams, who believed government’s role should be to help encourage finance and industry 
by building roads and canals and maintaining harbors. The Whigs eventually lost influence as they 
became divided over the issue of slavery and disappeared in the 1850s.
1860–1932 (The Republican Era)
With the dismantling of the Whigs, a new party emerged in the early 1850s. With the slogan “Free Labor, 
Free Land, Free Men,” the Republican party positioned itself as the party of western growth, finance, and 
industry and brought together anti-slavery forces and ex-Whigs to contain the expansion of slavery, with 
229

most of their supporters in the North and West. The majority of supporters were not abolitionists, but 
saw slavery as a constitutionally protected state matter. In 1860, with Abraham Lincoln on the ballot, the 
Republican party won the White House with an electoral college majority but no support from the South. 
Before Lincoln’s inauguration, seven states seceded from the Union, and the Civil War began in 1861.
The Civil War ended slavery, solidified the position of the Republican Party as one of the two major 
parties, and established the national government as supreme in the power struggle between the states 
and the national government. After the war, the Republicans stayed in power by waving the “bloody shirt 
of rebellion,” an image that blamed the Democrats for the war, and garnered the nickname GOP, or the 
Grand Old Party of the Union. There were only two Democratic presidents in this time period. The 
famous party symbols developed from Thomas Nast political cartoons– the elephant for the Republicans 
and the donkey for the Democrats, became popular. The images were meant originally as insults but 
eventually became party mascots. The South remained loyal to the Democratic Party, winning the 
nickname of “the Solid South.” Former slaves, whose political freedom was severely 
limited, allied themselves to the party of Lincoln. Loyalty to party reached its 
highest point in American history during this time, with voter turnout in the late 
1800s reaching levels as high as 75-85%. 
It was also during this period that third parties held a significant level of influence 
in national politics. On the major issues of this period—tariffs, prohibition, and the 
money supply—the Republicans and Democrats were fairly evenly divided. This 
allowed third parties, built around specific issues or personalities to champion 
causes that voters felt the two major parties sought to avoid. During the period the 
Greenback Party, Prohibition Party, Populist Party, Socialist Party, and Progressive Party all ran candidates 
and received a significant amount of public support. Three of the most memorable political names of this 
time period were closely aligned with the third party movement—William Jennings Bryan, Teddy 
Roosevelt, and Eugene V. Debs. Though none of the third parties actually elected a president they 
certainly influenced the political debate and even the outcomes of the elections.
1932–1952 - Democratic Party Control
The Great Depression created a national crisis, and the Republicans in power, particularly President 
Herbert Hoover, was blamed for his policies and inaction. The depth of the Depression caused a major 
shift in party loyalties in the presidential election of 1932. Democratic nominee Franklin Roosevelt 
promised to use the power of the government to combat the national emergency, and built a new 
coalition of supporters. As a result of this shift in loyalties the Democratic Party gained support from 
voters outside the South, including the traditional base of small farmers, southerners, and blue collar 
workers, but also gained increasing support from the poor, immigrants, and Jewish voters (many of these 
230

from Northern cities) as well as African Americans. This Democratic block of voters was generally referred 
to as the “New Deal Coalition.” Those who continued to support the Republican Party were mostly whitecollar workers, big business, and large farmers. But during the Great Depression these were in the 
minority, as Franklin Roosevelt won the presidency in four straight elections.
1952–Today - Democrats, Republicans, and Declining Political Loyalty
With the emergence of the Civil Rights Movement, party loyalty shifted again. As the Democratic Party 
began to be seen as allied to the struggle for equality and political power for African Americans, the 
Republican party began to make inroads into the “Solid South” and became the dominant party, ending a 
century of rule by Democrats. The New Deal coalition built during the Roosevelt years broke up, as 
Democrats looked for supporters among minority, urban, and progressive voters.
In general the United States has seen a decline in political party loyalties and a rise in political party 
independence. People in the U.S. simply do not vote in the number they once did, with less than a 
majority going to the polls. Voter apathy, reduced party loyalty, frustration with the political system, lack 
of inspiring candidates - all have been suggested as reasons for lower participation rates. There is an 
231

increasing number of independent voters, implying that people voted more for the candidate than for the 
party. There is an increasing significance of ideological labels (“conservative” or “liberal,” “right” or “left,”) 
rather than party labels to describe political philosophies.
The Two Party System and its Challenges 
As you can see, one of the results of democratization in America has been the development of a strong 
two-party political system. A two-party system is one in which there are two main political parties vying 
for control. These large parties must be politically center-of- the-road seeking broad voter support in 
order to win elections and control public policy. The tradition of the two-party system developed in the 
United States for a number of reasons. First, there was the Constitutional requirement of the electoral 
college for choosing a president. That means that in order to get elected a candidate must garner more 
than half the total Electoral College votes, not just a majority. Three or more major parties vying for the 
electoral college votes would frequently result in no candidate getting a majority, the election of the 
232

president would then be turned over to Congress and the people would have less say on who would be 
elected.
Second, there is a strong tradition of constituent representation in the United States.
Representatives are expected to represent a specific district, and it is expected that these representatives 
will be elected by a majority of the popular vote in those districts. The organization of Congress also 
depends upon the two-party system, where the Senate Majority Leader is the head of the party with the 
most people in the Senate and the Speaker of the House is the head of the party with the most people in 
the House of Representatives. Political parties also provide leadership and cooperation in the executive 
branch as most often members of the cabinet are chosen from the same party as the president. There 
have been very few times in American history when the party in office for president also held the majority 
in Congress. This means that there has to be cooperation and compromise between the legislative and 
executive branches, forming a check and balance on each other so that one party does not gain too much 
power.
233

Third, there are the election laws and finance laws which have over time been put into place that protect 
the two-party system. The election laws in many states only allow candidates from parties that ran
candidates in the last election to place names on the ballot. This makes it difficult for third-parties and 
independents to run if they cannot get their names on the ballot without going through a petition 
process. The finance laws are equally exclusive. If a presidential candidate represents a political party that 
received at least 2% of the popular vote in the last election, they will receive money from the national 
government for their campaign. However, it is highly unlikely that any member of a third party will receive 
that percentage of the vote when facing the two major parties.
Third parties, however, do provide a forum to alternative voices. These upstarts seldom get their 
candidates elected, but they can affect the outcome of elections and push their ideas into the political 
conversation. Third parties develop when segments of the population feel locked out of the political 
debate by the two major parties. Examples of issues that became part of the political debate through the 
efforts of third parties are abolition of slavery, prohibition, monetary policy, income tax, government 
regulation of transportation and communication systems, the eight-hour day, and protecting the 
environment.
In the American political tradition there are three types of third parties. The first is a party built around a 
specific issue. The Republican Party began as a third party dedicated to the limit of the expansion of 
slavery. The Anti-Mason Party was dedicated to keeping political control out of the hands of the Masons. 
The Greenback Party of the late 1800s urged the government to manage the money supply by printing 
paper money. The Dixiecrats of 1948 were opposed to Harry Truman’s efforts to desegregate the military 
234

and other civil rights measures. One of the most successful issue parties was the Populist Party of the 
1880s and 1890s. They worked to give the people more of a voice in government and protect the people 
from the capitalistic power of monopolies and trusts.
Another type of third party is the personality party. These parties are built around the personality of a 
charismatic leader rather than party or issues. Examples of personality parties are Teddy Roosevelt’s 
Progressive Party, George Wallace’s American Independent Party, and Ross Perot’s Reform Party.
Finally, a third type of third party is an ideological party. These include the Libertarian, Green, Socialist, 
and Communist parties to mention a few. These parties are based on social, economic, or political 
ideologies that are too far to the right or left to fit into mainstream American politics. Although ideological 
parties have never been very successful in America in terms of getting candidates elected, in periods of 
economic and/or social stress they have received significant voter support.
From time to time there has also been evidence of a single party challenge to the American two-party 
system. A single-party system is one in which one party dominates and controls all policy; this is not 
always a dictatorship, nor does it mean that there is no political conflict, it just means that one party has 
come to dominate when it comes to getting people elected. In some areas one of the two major parties 
has been discredited to the point that a true two-party system does not exist. Some have suggested that 
this is the case currently in northern Utah and southeastern Idaho where the Democratic Party has 
virtually ceased to exist in terms of representing the ideals of the people in local politics. A demonstration 
of this type of single-party can be found on local ballots for county commissioner, clerk, and assessor 
positions. This can be a dangerous situation as the ruling party can ignore its constituents because it can 
depend on their support. The minority party also ignores the voice of the people because it can never 
gain enough traction to gain political power. Without two healthy competing parties, the voice of the 
people can be stifled. These one-party political systems are often regional rather than national challenges 
but they also form an important part of American political culture.
There are other types of party systems in place around the world. The most common alternative systems 
are single party systems and multi-party systems. These alternatives may seem obvious, but they too 
have developed out of the existing political culture to meet the needs of people in certain situations. A 
single party system is where only one party exists, as in a dictatorship for example, or where only one 
party can get enough support from the people to win elections and influence policy. A multi-party system 
has three, four, five, six, or more parties, each with a chance of winning elections; these are most often 
found in parliamentary systems where parties are awarded seats in parliament based on a percentage of 
votes cast rather than on which party receives the most votes in a particular area.
Political Ideology
235

“Conservative” and “liberal” are ideological labels that must always be placed in the context of history. The 
policies and issues that a conservative or liberal believes in today may be quite different from what they 
believed eighty or ninety years ago. It is also important to remember that ideological labels are not 
inherently connected to political parties. As we look back through history or look at the conditions 
present in many countries today, those who supported popular government and the Free Market 
economy were often called the “liberals” (“classical liberalism”), because democracy and the free market 
represented a change from the tyranny and oppression that was most often present in the world. In 
other words, the “conservative” party in one time period could become the “liberal” party in another. 
Throughout much of the late 19th and early 20th centuries the Democratic Party was considered to be 
the conservative party and the Republican Party the liberal party. To gain an understanding of the role 
political ideology has played and continues to play in American politics it is important to start with 
“generic” definitions of the terms.
The “generic” definition of conservatism is defense of the status quo against major changes. If 
conservatives advocate change, it is usually a change to return to traditional ideas, values, and 
institutions. As we look back through history or look at the conditions present in many countries today, 
those who supported the tyrant and defended the rich against the poor were called the “conservatives” 
because tyrants and the power of the rich had been the status quo of the world. Not all conservatives are 
equal in their defense of the status quo or in their desire to return to the policies and practices of the 
past. Conservatives differ from each other based on their level of commitment to issues, ideas, and 
ideological principles; the more conservative, the stronger the commitment. Reactionaries, or extreme 
conservatives, will use force and violence if necessary to promote their goals.
The generic definition of liberalism is a desire for change, reform, and greater experimentation, as well as 
a greater willingness to accept new ideas, values, and institutions. A great example of this type of liberal 
thinking would be Franklin Roosevelt’s approach to the Great Depression. Hoover was more constrained 
in his policies because of his conservatism; FDR was more willing to try new ideas, programs, and policies 
because of his liberalism. Radical revolutionaries, or the most liberal, will use force and violence if 
necessary to promote their goals.
Conservatism and liberalism can be represented on a continuum, with the conservatives on the right and 
the liberals on the left. When the two ends of the ideological continuum are put together, a clearer 
picture of the entire scope of political ideology in the world and in our own country becomes apparent. 
Notice especially the position of the ideologically “moderate” on the continuum.
236

Some historians and political scientists like to draw the Ideological Continuum as a circle instead of a 
straight line because the goals at the extremes are different, but all extremists resort to the same 
methods to obtain their goals. Some examples of these extreme methods are warfare, terrorist activities, 
and assassinations. All extreme groups use violence, force and fear to obtain their goals.
In America examples of these extremes would be certain neo-Nazi groups or extreme anti- abortion 
groups on the right and extreme animal rights and environmental groups on the left.
Internationally an example of this extremism using similar methods would be Stalin and Hitler. Hitler was 
a reactionary (conservative) who used violence and intimidation to gain and maintain power while Stalin 
was a revolutionary (liberal) who used violence and intimidation to gain and maintain power.
In nations where dictators or chaos governs, extremism is a way of life and is the foundation of political 
traditions and governing power. In many democratic nations of the world, active politicians with political 
clout and influence can also be extremists. Political traditions in these countries, although strongest in 
the center, are also shaped, molded, and influenced by extremist political parties and groups.
In the United States, our political traditions have been pushed more decisively to the center. The 
operation of the two-party system, and the compromise it requires, tends to lock out extremists. 
Extremists exist but simply cannot get into the governing process nor have any significant influence on 
government policies. The American political character has a strong commitment to the Rule of Law – to 
fairness and justice – that allows us to come to a consensus on basic political principles and to ensure 
that the rights of everyone are represented. The nature of the Constitutional system in America requires 
compromise in the process of lawmaking and policy. And the two-party system makes it so that both 
parties must seek support from as many Americans as possible and so they must cater to a broad voting 
base. Extremist ideas do not appeal to many people, so the more moderate the platform of the party, the 
more people will join.
EXTREMISM LIBERALISM CONSERVATISM EXTREMISM
237

Today the Democratic Party is usually considered to be the liberal party in America because liberals feel 
more comfortable there, but the Democrats often attract those who consider themselves to be moderate 
conservatives. The Republican Party is often referred to as the conservative party today because 
conservatives feel more comfortable there, but the Republicans often attract those who consider 
themselves to be moderate Democrats. In fact both parties seek to attract those in the middle rather 
than on the fringe right or left because there are more moderate voters in the center than there are at 
the extreme right or left.