Week 7: The Basics of the Economy
The founders tried to carefully craft a political system through the Constitution that provided balance 
between order and freedom thus creating true liberty. A study of the American political system alone, 
however, does not tell the entire story behind the many liberties that Americans enjoy. The American 
economic system, often called a Market System, allows for a significant amount of freedom as to what is 
produced and what is consumed. It has provided a general economic prosperity, with several notable 
exceptions which we will study. In this chapter we will examine the market system, how it operates, how 
it has developed in the United States, and look at its weaknesses and strengths. We will also look at other 
types of economic systems, and the ways in which they can be compared and contrasted with a market 
economy, and the role that technology and trade have played in the economy.
The study of economics is the study of the choices people make, the actions people take, and the policy 
decisions that meet those wants and needs. Many of these choices are made individually; others are 
made collectively to create a community’s economic system. If the goods and services people wanted and 
needed were as readily available as dirt or air, there would be little need for people to make choices 
about what to produce and what to consume and therefore no need to study economics. Under current 
distribution methods, however, there simply are not enough resources, food, and services to meet all the 
needs and wants of people and nations and the result is scarcity. Scarcity is defined in several different 
ways. In some cases scarcity means not enough of the basic levels of food, clothing, and shelter 
necessary to sustain life. In others, scarcity is the inability to immediately satisfy all the wants and needs 
of the people. An important phenomenon that exists in modern societies like America is that the more 
access to goods and services people enjoy, the more they desire. In other words, scarcity is to some 
extent determined by one’s current economic condition coupled with the human desire to have more and 
pursuing one’s own self-interest.
137

In order to deal with the problem of scarcity, people are required to make economic choices. It is 
important that goods and services are produced to satisfy peoples’ wants and needs. Therefore, 
institutions must be organized to produce the goods and services people desire and to distribute those 
goods and services. Historically, three types of economic strategies have been employed to ensure 
correct levels of production and distribution and to solve the problems associated with scarcity. These 
three strategies are generally referred to as the traditional, command, and market.
The basic characteristics of a traditional economy developed around family and social relationships, with 
families producing the same goods and services for generations and distributing those goods and 
services through those same relationships. It was these kinds of traditional institutions that were most 
evident in hunting and gathering societies or in feudal societies based on heredity. Native American 
communities, prior to the arrival of European traders, were good examples of a traditional economy at 
work. Traditional economic systems served a purpose and were often successful but they tended to work 
most effectively when conditions remained static or constant, and found it difficult to adjust in times of 
social and economic upheaval or change. This lack of flexibility is one explanation as to why Native 
American societies were so deeply affected by the arrival of the Europeans as they disrupted traditional 
production and trade patterns.
The basic characteristics of a command economy include some form of “economic authority” to 
determine what is produced and how it is distributed. A command economy often is effective in 
requisitioning the finances and labor necessary for projects beyond the scope of the individual; such as 
the building of roads, bridges, and irrigations systems. A command economy also allows for, and at times 
directs economic change; such as the industrialization of the Soviet Union under Stalin or China’s Great 
Leap Forward under Mao. Command economies can be efficient in dealing with changing social and 
economic conditions and in gathering resources to meet an economic need, but they often severely 
restrict freedom in the marketplace.
A market economy relies on the free exchange of goods and services and the laws of supply and demand 
to determine what is produced and how it is to be distributed. People are free to choose what they will 
produce and what they will consume and the market system responds to reward or punish those 
decisions. This kind of system allows a great amount of individual freedom of choice, provides an 
incentive to make the “right” economic choices, and deals well with changing social and economic 
conditions. Unfortunately, it also allows people to engage in what may be considered greedy or corrupt 
practices in an effort to achieve economic success.
138

The Market System
In 1776, the same year as the Declaration of Independence, Enlightenment philosopher Adam Smith 
published An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations. In his book, now more 
commonly referred to as The Wealth of Nations, 
Smith examined the emerging market system, 
and tried to explain how it operated. Smith, along 
with Karl Marx and John Maynard Keynes, has 
been celebrated as one of the most prominent 
figures in economic history and is considered one 
of the “fathers” of modern capitalism.
According to Smith, it is a “self-love” or “selfinterest”—a desire to make a profit—that drives 
the market system. This idea of economic selfinterest may be referred to simply as “incentive,” 
but this incentive is a powerful motivator in 
encouraging people in a market system to work 
and create. As Smith said, it is “not from the 
benevolence of the butcher, the brewer, or the 
baker that we expect our dinner,” but rather the butcher, baker, and brewer do what they do in an effort 
to satisfy their own self-interest. If they satisfy others needs at the same time, well, that is the miracle of a 
system based upon free exchange.
As many people make decisions and choices about what to produce and what to consume, and in the 
exchange process seek to fulfill their own self-interest, everyone in the exchange benefits and the general 
standard of living rises. It is important to understand that the notion that a free market is a system that 
runs on greed is incorrect. Self-interest or self- love is not the same thing as greed, especially unbridled 
greed rooted in pride. Those people greedy for wealth and power are generally in favor of legal changes 
that destroy property rights and markets. In modern industrial societies, this tendency toward selfinterest encourages manufacturers to increase productivity in an effort to maximize profits. This 
increased productivity is possible, according to Smith, because of an accumulation of capital investment, 
which requires savings on the part of society and investing a share of the profits on the part of business, 
and through an ever finer “division of labor” where the production process is divided into separate parts 
and each part is performed by a practiced laborer.
Smith also explained how the market system provided an orderly solution to the problems of production 
and distribution. First, the motive of self-interest creates the necessary engine to put the system of 
139

production to work. Second, the changing desires of 
society guide what and how much was produced. 
Smith called this guiding mechanism the “invisible 
hand,” but it is now most often referred to as the 
Laws of Supply and Demand. And third, competition 
in the market place prevents producers from 
charging more than the market price for goods and 
services. If the price of a good became too high, 
others would join in production thus lowering prices 
and profits.
The law of demand states that as prices rise, the 
quantity consumers demand goes down. The law of 
supply states as prices rise, the quantity suppliers 
are willing to produce goes up. These two laws, 
interacting with each other in the market system, 
determine what goods are produced and how much those goods will cost. Greater demand will push 
prices up and encourage more production, and as supply cannot keep up with demand, it pushes prices 
up further. Less demand and increased supply will drive prices down and discourage production. 
Surpluses and shortages occur, and those adjustments push the market to an equilibrium price (the price 
at which the same quantity is being demanded as is being supplied).
In this interaction between supply and demand, the consumer ultimately determines what is produced. If 
demand increases, producers will increase production to meet those demands. This principle is known as 
“Consumer Sovereignty” because the consumer becomes the all-powerful director of the market. Another 
result of the interaction between supply and demand is a general efficiency in how resources are used. 
Abundant resources cost less and are used more, while scarce resources cost more and are used less. 
Higher prices and profits encourage more competition and competition normally reduces prices and 
profits.
140

The free market system, also often called capitalism or free enterprise, has several strengths. First, it 
operates within an atmosphere of freedom, both in what labor is performed and what is consumed, thus 
offering participants a great amount of personal satisfaction.
Second, it provides a tremendous incentive to work and to create. Third, it takes advantage of the 
“miracle of exchange,” or the idea that when the system is allowed to operate freely, every exchange 
results in a higher standard of living (again tied to incentive). Fourth, it works in harmony with basic 
human nature as the search for the fulfillment of individual wants and needs (self-interest) becomes a 
natural incentive to work and create. Fifth it works in a natural way to allocate resources, scarce 
resources cost more and are used less, plentiful resources cost less and are used more. And finally, 
capitalism or the free market controls prices and profits through the natural laws of supply and demand.
Despite these strengths, and the amazing growth countries like the United States who practice a form of 
capitalism have experienced, capitalism does have weaknesses. Some of these would be the unequal 
distribution of wealth, the level to which economic freedom allows for greed and dishonesty and 
threatens economic virtue, price instability, and production instability. Some of these weaknesses will be 
explored in greater depth in Lesson 8.
In a purely capitalist economy, there is little if any government regulation. This is usually described as 
“laissez faire” capitalism, a phrase which literally means “leave it alone.” Few if any nations practice pure 
capitalism and the United States certainly does not. The American economy is sometimes referred to as a 
regulated capitalism or the market system. Even though government regulations can have a profound 
influence on economic growth, the growth and complexities of the economy can also have a profound 
effect on the need for government regulation. As the economy has become larger, more complex, and 
more national and international in its scope, the temptations to exploit economic opportunities in a 
negative way have also increased. Not all government regulation and involvement in the economy has 
come as a result of this declining economic virtue, but declining virtue has been a contributing factor.
141

Another tension embedded in a capitalistic system is where do the positive characteristics of initiative 
and incentive end and the negative characteristic of greed begin? Watching the video for Lesson 7 
entitled “Greed” provides some insights into the balance between greed and incentive in the capitalist 
system.
Because of the profit motive, there is always the temptation to unnaturally and unlawfully circumvent the 
laws of supply and demand and eliminate the competition. Profits can best be maintained when there is 
no competition; as a result creating a market controlled by one supplier is always a temptation. 
Copyrights and patents issued by the government to some extent create temporary monopolies to 
protect the investments companies and individuals have made and to help recoup the costs of that 
development. These corporations create great profits for stockholders, but often monopolies prevent the 
laws of supply and demand from working freely to create competition. Monopolies can result in 
increased costs and hardships to workers and consumers, and the opportunity for exploitation and 
corruption increases.
Socialism 
In response to capitalism’s weaknesses, many competing economic models have been presented that 
attempt to create a different type of economy. The most famous critic of capitalism was Karl Marx (1818-
1883). Marx was born into an upper middle-class family in what today is Germany and during his 
historical studies as a university student he became focused on world economic problems and the 
revolutionary changes brought about by industrialization. Marx objected to capitalism because he felt 
that capitalism distributed wealth unequally, gave political and social power to only a few, rewarded the 
workers much less that the “owners,” and frequently created wasteful surpluses and shortages of goods 
and services. Marx criticized the greed of the bourgeoisie (the ruling classes) that caused the suffering of 
the proletariat (the laborers).
Marx suggested an alternative plan that has come to be known as “Marxism” or “socialism.” In a socialist 
economy, property is owned publicly by the people or the state. This is sometimes referred to as 
collective ownership. The basic economic questions under socialism are answered not by the laws of 
supply and demand but through a command economy where economic decisions are made by 
government bureaucracies. Socialistic societies (like the Soviet Union under Stalin or China under Mao) 
are famous for the five- year plans where goals were set and resources were allocated. The primary 
motivations or goals in a socialist economy are to create economic equality; to provide security for jobs, 
health care, and finances; and to transform static, tradition based, agricultural economies into modern 
industrial economies. It should be noted that there are similarities between Marxist socialism and the 
142

“command” strategy. A major difference is that Marx’s plan was developed specifically as a response to 
capitalism.
Socialism has its strengths, and its philosophy does offer advantages when compared to the weaknesses 
of the market system. Many democratic countries, particularly in Europe, have chosen elements of 
socialism in their economic policy. Socialism facilitates a collective response to collective problems. It 
provides an efficient mechanism to bring a nation’s total economic capacity to bear against economic 
shortages. It offers solutions to the most glaring weaknesses of capitalism. And, lastly, its goals are to 
bring about economic equality, security, and support for a society’s weakest members that many people 
desire.
Socialism has its weaknesses as well. With few direct personal economic rewards in a socialist system, 
there is less incentive to work and produce. The people who live under a socialist system have limited or 
no choices in terms of what to produce and what to consume. Also, since the system has seldom 
achieved the stated ideal of equality and security and since total political and economic controls are often 
required to impose and maintain a socialist society, the governments that manage socialist systems can 
be repressive in nature. Finally, under pure socialism individual ownership and management of property 
is replaced by state ownership and state or democratic management of property. The agency of man is 
thus restricted and the opportunity for development along with it.
The term communism is often misused as a synonym for socialism. Communism refers to a socialist 
economic system combined with a totalitarian (dictatorship) political system.
Under communism, the command system is highly developed and often repressive. In today’s world the 
two most prominent economic systems are socialism and capitalism, however, virtually no society 
practices a purely socialist or purely capitalist system. Although both socialism and capitalism contain 
some residual elements of a traditional economy, they are for the most part based on some combination 
of command and market economy strategies.
When choosing between economic systems, the choice is sometimes framed as a planned economy or an 
unplanned economy. But the question really is not whether there should be planning. It is a question of 
who should plan. Should a mastermind, a state bureaucracy, or elected politicians make decisions about 
what should be produced, how, and by whom? Or should each individual be able to plan in accordance 
with his own dreams and goals? As each individual makes his own plans in accord with his self-interest, 
the invisible hand, or the market forces of supply and demand, guides the individual to act in the 
interests of others. If you are to become wealthy in a free market economy, you must come up with a 
good or service that millions of others are willing to voluntarily give up some of their scarce money for. 
History has taught that in a system where each is able to plan for himself, the coordinating effects of the 
143

market system create more abundance out of the scarcity we are given than the centrally planned 
alternative.
The United Order - An Early Church Economic Experiment 
Moses 7:18— And the Lord called his people Zion, because they were of one heart and one mind, and 
dwelt in righteousness; and there was no poor among them.
D&C 70:14 — Nevertheless, in your temporal things you shall be equal, and this not grudgingly, 
otherwise the abundance of the manifestations of the Spirit shall be withheld.
The United Order was an organization through which the Saints in the early days of the restored Church 
sought to live the law of consecration. Individuals shared property, goods, and profits, receiving these 
things according to their wants and needs. In the scriptures, especially in the Doctrine and Covenants the 
Lord outlined a plan that is a better economic system than either capitalism or socialism, and which 
incorporated elements of command and market economies. The principles upon which the United Order 
are based were connected to efforts to establish Zion here on earth.
After the Church was restored in 1830, one of the first revelations to Joseph Smith was about the law of 
consecration and the order of stewardships.(Doctrine and Covenants 42).
This revelation instructed members to consecrate their properties to a presiding bishop, who would then 
assign out stewardships over properties and businesses that would enable the support of families. 
Surpluses from production were to be for the benefit of the needy and the expenses of building up the 
kingdom, as it said in the revelation, “And if thou obtainest more than that which would be for thy 
support, thou shalt give it into my storehouse.” All Saints were expected to be industrious and contribute 
to the working of the whole, to work together in equal measure, and to “not be idle; for he that is idle 
shall not eat the bread nor wear the garments of the laborer.”
The law of consecration and stewardship came to be known as the “United Order,” and was practiced in 
varying degrees in early Latter-day Saint communities in Illinois, Iowa, and Nebraska. The United Order 
was based on four key principles. First, that the earth is the Lord’s and all that man possesses belongs to 
Him. Second, the individual voluntarily enters into covenant to consecrate his time, talents, wealth, and 
property to the kingdom of God (by deeding his property to the bishop). Third, the Church then deeds 
back to the steward property to maintain the family, where “every man equal according to his family, 
according to his circumstances and his wants and needs” (D&C 51:3). Fourth, the surplus balance of 
production is given to the bishop’s storehouse, from which the bishop is authorized to give to the poor 
and needy.
144

In the early 1870s, Brigham Young began organizing community-wide United Orders of Enoch. Over a 
hundred such communities were established. Each person was asked to contribute his economic 
property to the community. Every able-bodied adult was given an assignment or stewardship necessary 
for the functioning of the community —to plant crops, prepare meals, sew clothing, teach children, build 
houses, handle livestock, or nurse the sick. Participation was voluntary in this communal way of life, and 
private property was maintained, as well as the focus on the individual’s contribution and value. 
Motivation for participating in the community was love of neighbor, love of God, and the desire to be 
obedient. The ideal was equality, the elimination of poverty, and the self-sufficiency of the community in 
a cooperative venture.
The communities practicing this type of economic lifestyle were short-lived. The United Order was 
suspended, cooperative businesses closed, and the experiment ended. Over the next century of Church 
history, leaders were inspired to institute the law of tithing, the law of the fast, and the Church welfare 
program. These programs and doctrines share some of the same principles of the United Order, but do 
not require or expect full consecration as those communities did in the early Church.
It is significant that love, not financial wealth, is the ruling motivation for the United Order. This means 
that for most a change in attitude or heart would be required to live the United Order. But as in all things 
in the Lord’s plan, this change is voluntary, not forced as in socialism, and it is individual. Love and service 
to others is a key principle in the United Order, but there is also an underlying attempt to fulfill self-love, 
both in allowing for personal choice and fulfillment and in creating a system where participating faithfully 
in the system brings to the participant the eternal blessings of God. This is a significantly different kind of 
“self-love” than that described by Adam Smith. The United Order creates sense of ownership, incentive, 
and responsibility, but also creates a certain equality of earthly things. Needs and wants are met and 
freedom of choice is maintained, but full economic freedom is restrained by a higher standard of selfinterest—virtue, not the accumulation of wealth.
145

Here is a chart that compares the motivations and structure of these three types of economic systems —
capitalism, socialism, and the United Order.
Capitalism Socialism United Order
Who owns or controls 
the property?
Corporations 
Businesses Individuals
The “state” The “people” 
The collective 
ownership of property
Corporations 
Businesses Individuals
How are the basic 
questions answered?
Through the free 
exchange of goods and 
services Directed by the 
laws of supply and 
demand
Through government 
agencies and 
bureaucracies State 
planning Five-year plans
Through the free 
exchange of goods and 
services Directed by the 
laws
of supply and demand 
With priesthood 
direction for community 
projects
What motivations 
draw people to accept 
the system?
Desire for wealth and 
profit
Desire for economic 
freedom
Desire to work and 
create
Desire for economic 
equality
Desire for economic 
Security
A love of God A desire 
to be obedient
A love of neighbor A 
desire to work and 
create
Economic Growth in the United States Through the Market System 
For most of its history, the United States has practiced a form of the market economy and that story is 
one of success and revolutionary growth and expansion. In the early years of the British colonies, nothing 
traveled faster than a horse. Communication was limited, there had been very little innovation or 
invention for centuries, and most people remained in the same economic station for generations. The 
vast majority of Americans worked long hours for nothing more than just enough calories to survive, one 
set of clothes barely sufficient for protection from the elements, and a small one room dwelling with a 
dirt floor and no running water. The average life expectancy at birth in America was about 36 years.
The English colonies operated under mercantilism, which limited industry and depended on the colonies 
as providers of raw materials and markets for its goods with the main goal of funneling wealth back into 
the national treasury. The New World had opened up land ownership and opportunity, so the basic 
146

commitment to private property ownership came with the colonists. Because of the restrictive economic 
conditions in Europe, most saw their journey to the colonies as an opportunity to own property and to 
improve their economic and social position. The abundant resources of the colonies fostered the 
development of market opportunities. In contrast once again with much of Europe, where many 
resources were either used up or heavily controlled, the American continent was teeming with wildlife, 
fish, timber, and productive land. Trade between colonies and in international markets was a natural 
development.
As the colonies grew, they began to push back against the mercantilist system and the regulations and 
limitations of the British monopolies that enforced them. Puritan religious beliefs helped foster the idea 
of self-interest and influenced economic thinking. Many saw success in this life as a potential indication of 
salvation in the next. Their belief in predestination also made worldly success important as an evidence 
of God’s favor. The accumulation of wealth was seen as an important sign of God’s eternal approval.
There were brief experiments with other types of economic practices in the colonies. In the Carolinas, 
there were attempts to replicate the feudal system of peasants and lords that had been the practice in 
much of Europe. The Pilgrims initially practiced a type of socialistic communalism, with all lands and 
profits held in common. After the first year of settlement, nearly half of the Pilgrims had perished. 
Governor William Bradford wrote that common ownership had created “much confusion and discontent 
and retard much employment that would have been to their benefit and comfort.” The system of forced 
redistribution among the settlers bred resentment amongst the survivors. After several years of 
starvation conditions, the settlement charted a different course.
Bradford assigned every family a parcel of land, doing away with communal ownership in an attempt to 
raise as much food as possible. As a result, the colony became prosperous, as individual families became 
more industrious and more personally invested in economic success.
The idea at the heart of a free market economy was expressed valiantly in just one part of one sentence 
of the Declaration of Independence. “Men...are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, 
that among these are Life, Liberty, and the Pursuit of Happiness.” If men have, from God, the right to life, 
it follows that they then have the right to sustain life, and thus have the rights to the fruits of their labors, 
or in other words, the right to pursue happiness. Modern economists believe that the right to property 
and the enforcement of property rights is the key institution that supports the successful establishment 
of a free market economy. For this reason the free market economy can be appropriately labeled the 
private property order.
Despite these natural incentives toward a market system, under the Constitution there is no real 
requirement that America practice capitalism. But there are certain Constitutional components that 
reinforce capitalistic attitudes. Amendment V states “Nor shall any person be...deprived of life, liberty, or 
147

property without due process of law.” Therefore, the Constitution protects private property ownership, a 
ruling principle in capitalism. And in Article I, Sec. 8 the Constitution promotes “the Progress of Science 
and useful Arts” through copyrights and patents. Therefore, the Constitution guarantees the rights of 
artists and inventors to not only “own” their intellectual creations but to enjoy the economic benefits 
derived from those creations. It would be very difficult, without some major amendments to or 
reinterpretations of the Constitution, for socialism to be practiced in America.
The Constitution was critical to the development of a successful market economy. It created secure 
property rights so that entrepreneurs could keep the fruits of their labors. It created rule of law so that 
sudden radical changes in the legal system that would cause greater risk and uncertainty for 
entrepreneurs were impossible. It limited the federal government’s ability to intervene in the economy. 
Through the commerce clause the Constitution supported free trade between individual states. In short, 
the Constitution codified and helped create the conditions of economic freedom.
After independence and the establishment of the new government under the Constitution, from 1789 
through the end of the Civil War, the American economy grew but the nature of the economy remained 
virtually the same. Most Americans were farmers and those who were not farmers engaged in small 
business enterprises that produced goods for local markets—neighbors trading with neighbors. Most 
businesses employed one to five employees so there was direct communication between the owners and 
the workers. And most businesses represented very little capital investment, thus they could be started 
and stopped in response to market demands with very little adverse affect to the business. Given these 
conditions, unregulated, laissez faire capitalism seemed natural and acceptable. There were few largescale abuses of workers and/or consumers because there were no large-scale businesses or markets. If 
there were local abuses these could usually be worked out by individuals at the local level. Government 
regulation of the economy seemed unnecessary.
The major economic questions that engaged the government during this early period involved the overall 
operation of the economy rather than how individual businesses participated in the economy, and the 
role, constitutionally; the government should play in encouraging economic development. A first theme 
revolved around the government’s role in regulating money and banking. Federally chartered banks were 
constitutionality questioned, and the use of paper money as compared to specie (gold and silver) was 
debated. In the first 100 years of American economic development nationally chartered banks were 
created twice, and twice disbanded. Although paper money was used at times, for example during the 
Revolutionary and Civil Wars, it was seen as an immoral and dishonest with no real value. Gold and silver 
coins served as the standard mediums of exchange because of their intrinsic value as a commodity.
A second theme dealt with the role of the national government in promoting and financing transportation 
projects. Roads, canals, harbors, and railroads were all necessary to economic development, but these 
148

projects often were often beneficial to one section of the country over another and they were expensive 
enough that no individual was likely to decide to build a road. Should someone in Georgia be taxed to pay 
for a road or canal from which they, personally, would never see any benefit? Should each individual 
farmer be forced to build his own road to market his crops? The determination was made that the 
national government should encourage state or private development of canals, roads, and railroads but 
should not itself engage in owning or building transportation systems. Harbor and some river 
improvement projects were undertaken by the national government because they were seen as 
connected to national defense, and some postal roads were also federally managed. More generally, the 
national government encouraged development of transportation projects by offering land to private 
companies who were willing to risk the expense.
A third theme centered on the role of the national government in encouraging and/or regulating 
business. Tariffs, additional taxes placed on foreign goods, encouraged American business and therefore 
were seen as positive, but they often created sectional jealousies, which were also seen as a negative. 
Bounties encouraged farmers to grow for the market and encouraged higher farm prices, but resulted in 
higher food prices to consumers. In neither case did the government attempt to regulate business or 
agriculture, just to encourage it. Conflicts between labor and industry (which really didn’t receive much 
national attention until after the Civil War) were seen as an attempt on the part of workers to interfere 
with private property (business) and thus government’s first responsibility was to protect private property 
and punish disgruntled workers.
Businesses and farms were private property and therefore beyond the scope of government regulation 
without due process of law.
After the Civil War the American economic system changed dramatically. There were several interworking 
conditions that led to this growth in industrial America. Businesses evolved from small, local enterprises 
which employed several people, with little capital investment, into large national enterprises, employing 
thousands of people, with enormous capital investments. These large industries were headed up by 
powerful entrepreneurs, men like Andrew Carnegie (steel), John D. Rockefeller (oil), Jay Gould (railroads), J. 
P. Morgan (banking), and Gustavus Swift (meat packing). The innovation of new technologies, especially 
railroads and the growth of steel and oil, and new sources of power in coal and electricity, drove the 
creation of industrial machinery.
The connections fostered by the development of the railroad created a national mass market, and 
supported the creation of department stores such as Sears and Roebuck, Montgomery Ward and Macy’s. 
The invention and introduction of new products as varied as indoor plumbing, telephones, chewing gum, 
deodorant, corn flakes, toothpaste, cosmetics and safety razors created new consumers and new 
industries. Along with this development came the birth of modern advertising of these new products that 
149

quickly became essential to American life. These new products were produced in new ways, utilizing new 
strategies of production that were very different when contrasted with the artisan production of the preCivil War era.
The establishment of economies of scale, the more of one item you produce the cheaper it becomes, 
played a large part in fostering big business. The formation of assembly line production represented the 
ultimate expression of Adam Smith’s division of labor. Horizontal combinations combined businesses 
that produced the same or similar products. Vertical combinations combined all the business activities of 
a single product from the acquisition of raw materials through sales.
And out of these combinations came monopolies, trusts, and holding companies developed specifically to 
eliminate competition in the market place and thus maximize profits.
With this growth in size and economic power businesses evolved into institutions of national influence. 
These corporations created great profits for stockholders, but because those monopolies prevented the 
laws of supply and demand from working freely to create competition, they also resulted in exploitation 
and hardships for workers and consumers. Some began to argue that in such a new economic 
environment, government would have to play a larger role in guaranteeing economic freedom and 
opportunity. This movement, called Progressivism, will be examined in Lesson 8, while the complete 
breakdown of supply and demand in this new industrial order during the Great Depression will be 
studied in Lesson 9.
Technological Changes Through Economic Freedom
Are you richer than the richest American of all time was? This is a serious question asked by a famous 
principles of economics textbook. The oil entrepreneur John D. Rockefeller lived from 1839 to 1937 and 
generated some $200 billon of wealth. If you could have $200 billion on the condition that you could only 
spend money on the types of things that Rockefeller could have spent his money on in the 1890s, would 
you take it? In other words, would you be willing to give up all modern conveniences for the rest of your 
life for $200 billion? 1890 predates any significant distribution of electric power. So you would not be able 
to purchase electrical appliances or electronics like telephone, internet, air conditioning, refrigerator, or 
even electric lights. What happens if you get sick or decide to have a child? Imagine a hospital without 
electricity or even antibiotics. Most Americans would rather live the way they do now than have the 1890 
lifestyle of the richest American ever.
How is it that a relatively poor American is so much better off today than the richest American ever was in 
1890? The key is technological change. Technological change not only gives consumers more options, it 
makes workers more productive. Workers today can produce more in an hour of work than Americans a 
150

century ago or even a couple of decades ago. Consider as just one small example the standard of living of 
pioneer and frontiersman Daniel Boone who lived from 1734 to 1820. His father was a nail maker. When 
young Daniel first started making nails he could only make 50 nails after a long day of hard work. His 
father could make 200 nails in a long day.
Workers in nineteenth century America, even in many cases young children, worked very long hours to 
supply just the bare necessities and had an average life expectancy much lower than today. Most workers 
could not produce enough to support their families singlehandedly. Today, nail industry workers are able 
to make many hundreds of thousands of nails working fewer hours than their counterparts 200 years 
ago.
The following link to the World Bank table puts the growth of the United States economy into 
comparative perspective. It shows GDP to demonstrate standard of living of various nations around the 
world. GDP (gross domestic product) is the measure of the market value of all the goods and services 
produced by citizens of a country in a given year. The U. S. standard of living in 1840 was comparable to 
Tonga’s standard of living today. The output per person of the U. S. economy at the time of the nation’s 
birth was comparable to poverty stricken nations of today. GDP on average rose by 2.1 percent each year 
during the second half of the twenty-first century. At this rate, the amount of goods and services 
produced per person each year doubles about every 33 years. View this example. 
Why has the United States succeeded economically when other areas of the world have not? The answer 
is complicated, but one of the pieces of the puzzle is the use of technology. When we look across the 
world we see that in societies where technology has been adopted and where the workers have the 
educational levels necessary to use technology, standards of living are high. In areas in the world where 
technology is not used and where the workers are by and large uneducated, most people live in poverty.
The implementation of technology requires a risky expenditure of time and money. Those that take the 
risks necessary to bring workers and capital (i.e., tools, machinery, plants, and equipment) together to 
create jobs and wealth are called entrepreneurs. In countries with entrepreneurs we see implementation 
of technology and wealth creation, whereas, in countries without entrepreneurs we see stagnation.
Why do some countries have entrepreneurs and others do not? The answer lies in the fact that rules 
governing economies differ substantially around the world. Some economic systems create an 
environment where creativity and wealth creation is rewarded and entrepreneurship flourishes.
Under other economic systems, there are substantial roadblocks for entrepreneurs that crush creativity 
and innovation. The system of rules in which entrepreneurs can succeed and in which technological 
change results is often called economic freedom. Economic freedom is created by a system of rules 
151

where property rights are protected and the rule of law prevails. Countries with economic freedom have 
low tax rates, low amounts of regulation, and very little corruption.
In countries without economic freedom markets and entrepreneurship are hampered. In many of these 
countries the standard of living is much like it was in America during the eighteenth century, as the lack of
property rights, rule of law, and high corruption make entrepreneurship impossible. To start a business in 
some countries, many thousands of dollars of bribes must be paid out to corrupt government 
bureaucrats. After the business is started there is a constant risk of government policy destroying the 
business. Most new ventures in countries where small business is encouraged, like in the United States, 
fail within the first five years. If starting a business in a country where private property rights and the rule 
of law is respected is risky, imagine how difficult entrepreneurship is in a country without economic 
liberty? It is no wonder why many countries of the world languish in poverty for generation after 
generation. The lack of access to capital, the difficulties of gaining education, the lack of technology, the 
failure of the rule of law — all combine to create a system that crushes the initiative of entrepreneurial 
citizens and makes upward mobility, education, and achievement difficult.
152

The level of economic freedom within a country can powerfully influence economic outcomes. As just one 
example, many students in the African country of Guinea study under streetlights at Guinea's G'bessi 
Airport. They gather at the airport because they are not able to obtain prohibitively expensive electric 
power in their homes. However, many of these students own cell phones. They have access to the new 
technology of cell phones because the rules governing their use provided entrepreneurs with the 
incentives they need to provide that service. The government imposed restrictive rules on electric power 
generation, so that older technology is not as cheaply and readily available.
When entrepreneurs are given the economic freedom they need, the invisible hand of the market guides 
profit driven entrepreneurs to solve problems and increase standards of living. High copper prices for 
instance frustrate plumbers, telephone companies, and electricians who must use copper in their 
businesses. If an entrepreneur can find a good alternative to copper and start a business providing 
consumers with it, she can make a large profit. In the case of copper, as copper prices went up 
entrepreneurs started companies making fiber optic cables, which replaced copper wire in some 
applications in the communications industry. Entrepreneurs have also started companies making plastic 
pipes that plumbers can use instead of the more expensive copper pipes. As copper is replaced by 
alternative products, it becomes economically less scarce and the price goes down.
An entrepreneur can earn significant profits by identifying the problems of others that she can solve. The 
greater the pain, the more the consumer is willing to pay the entrepreneur to solve the problem. The 
entrepreneur that finds a good substitute to the high priced resource not only earns a high profit, but 
solves the consumer’s problem, and by decreasing demand for the high priced resource, causes the price 
of the resource to go down. In this way, supply and demand guides the profit-seeking entrepreneur to 
solve critical problems. For example, it was during the high gas prices of the 1970s that cars became 
substantially more fuel efficient. Economists have found that when energy prices are high, air 
conditioners become more energy efficient. When energy prices are relatively low, entrepreneurs focus 
on making air conditioners cheaper to produce and purchase, rather than more energy efficient. Since 
profits are found by solving problems, the technological change that drives economic growth is targeted 
in ways that do the most good.
International Trade
In early America, under mercantilism, trade between the colonies and other nations was highly regulated, 
and most trade was confined to those countries in the British Empire. Once independence was won, the 
United States looked to increase industry and trade. The Constitution took down the trade barriers that 
had governed commerce between individual states. But international free trade was not the goal. Until 
the passage of the 16th amendment that instituted a federal income tax, the government paid for its 
153

operations mainly through tariffs and customs duties. A tariff is a tax placed on imports or exports that 
adds to the cost of the good. Tariffs helped the new nation compete with more powerful countries and 
established industries abroad and helped promote homegrown industrial development. At times through 
its history the United States has also enacted embargoes (prohibiting the importation of certain goods for 
economic or political reasons) and quotas (allowing a limited amount of importation depending on needs 
and cost).
There are many reasons why nations erect these barriers to trade in the form of tariffs, embargoes, 
duties, and quotas. It can be a form of tax paid by non-citizens, and can raise substantial revenue for the 
government. The extra cost of an imported good helps protect domestic business and labor. An American 
company, struggling to compete with foreign producers, benefits when tariffs make those foreign goods 
more expensive to the consumer or if quotas and embargoes prevent their importation in the first place. 
As American businesses prosper that creates more jobs for American workers, and protects that business 
from foreign competition.
However, if the “free” Market System creates prosperity when operating within one nation, why wouldn’t 
it create similar prosperity if operating worldwide? What if there were fewer barriers and tariffs between 
nations, and trade increased? Traditionally, trade between nations has been severely restricted but in 
recent decades there has been an increasing debate over the issue of “free trade” and the idea of “free 
trade zones.” The reasons to encourage free trade are closely associated with the strengths of the market 
economy—incentive, creativity, choice, opportunity and economic competition. Critics of “free trade” 
point to countries with weaker economies and lower labor costs which disadvantage the United States. 
Those who argue for “free trade” and open markets suggest that with equal access to the world’s goods 
and services there would be less reason for international competition and war. Over the past thirty years 
America has moved toward free trade between nations. This move has come through international trade 
agreements like the General Agreement of Tariffs and Trade (GATT 1948), the North American Free Trade 
Agreement (NAFTA 1992), the World Trade Organization (WTO 1993), and the Trans-Pacific Partnership 
(TPP 2016). In the global marketplace, the interrelatedness of the world economy makes trade laws and 
regulations incredibly complex.
The Church’s Teachings on the Market Economy 
As agency is one of the greatest gifts of God, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has strongly 
supported democratic and republican principles. For the same reason, members and church leaders 
have generally supported the principles and practices of the market system rather than socialism, as it 
allows for more agency and accountability. The Declaration of Independence expressed the idea of 
“unalienable” rights and the “pursuit of happiness.” The Constitution established rule of law wherein 
154

these unalienable rights found protection. By guaranteeing to man the God-given right to private 
property, the agency of man is protected, and a free market economy is created. People can only flourish 
in an environment of freedom where they can act as agents unto themselves to pursue their own 
happiness in a righteous stewardship.
The 8th Commandment given through Moses, “Thou shalt not steal,” presupposes the existence of 
private property. In this dispensation the doctrine of the Church has reaffirmed the paramount 
importance of the right to property: “We believe that no government can exist in peace, except such laws 
are framed and held inviolate as will secure to each individual the free exercise of conscience, the right 
and control of property, and the protection of life.” (Doctrine and Covenants 134:2).
The remarkable economic progress of the United States and other countries that have adopted similar 
governmental systems is the result of the free market system.
In 1805 when Lewis and Clark set out to explore the western part of the North American continent, 
nothing traveled faster than a horse —not even communication. After centuries of almost no change in 
the income or economic activity of everyday people, the world dramatically changed sometime between 
1820 and 1830. We, as members of the Church, understand the timing of this shift in the economics of 
the world. Modern prophets have taught that the establishment of the Constitution was necessary for the 
“marvelous work and wonder” that is the restoration of the gospel. In fact, the continuation of liberty is 
essential for us to continue to build God’s Kingdom upon the earth. Without freedom, especially religious 
freedom, God’s servants would not have had the opportunity to restore and preach the gospel. And 
economic progress and freedom have played an important part in maintaining that liberty.
The prophet Joel in the Old Testament prophesied that in the last days the Lord would pour out His spirit 
upon all flesh (Joel 2: 28). Joseph Fielding Smith taught that one of the manifestations of the spirit of the 
Lord being poured out upon all flesh has been the remarkable advances in technology and scientific 
innovation that has been uniquely associated with the last days. This technological change greatly 
facilitates the spread of the gospel. The invention of the movable type printing press made it possible for 
the Bible to be printed for the common man centuries ago. In today’s world, satellite and internet 
technology makes it possible for people all around the world to listen to modern prophets during the 
General Conference of the Church. As the “just and holy principles” of the Constitution have been 
exported to the rest of the world, both the gospel and economic progress have followed.
In countries like the United States that have a relatively free market economy, we often observe behavior 
among its most successful participants that we find to be deplorable. Disparities in wealth, economic 
depressions, and dishonest business practices often cause people to call into question whether a market 
economy is truly based on a foundation of “just and holy principles.” However, acts of fraud and theft 
violate the right to property and must be prosecuted in order for a free market economy to be truly free 
155

and to function well. Further, freedom requires responsibility. In order to maintain the blessings of 
liberty, we must remain moral. The Book of Mormon teaches that pride leads to secret combinations 
which lead to legal plunder and the destruction of the rule of law, thus undermining free markets. We 
have also been commanded to be righteous stewards, and to serve God by caring for and empowering 
those that are less fortunate. Ultimately prosperity is obtained by nations as they keep the 
commandments of God.