Week 13: The Spirit of Change 
and Reform
The spirit of change and reform has always been a key component of American history and of the 
American way of life. From the reform sought by the Pilgrims and Puritans and continuing in the midst of 
revolution and a new form of government, the United States has long experienced and valued change 
and reform, perhaps more so than longer established countries and societies. We have examined that 
spirit through colonization, independence, democratization, industrialization, Progressivism, the New 
Deal, and the Civil Rights Movement. In this chapter we will continue to look at change and reform, first 
with an overview of Jacksonian reform in the early Republic, and then by looking at more recent social 
change and upheaval in the Great Society and Youth Rebellion of the 1960s that attempted to deal with 
some of the same issues.
We will also examine the impact of the revolution in technology over the last 200 years, and a consumer 
culture unmatched in the history of the world, and the spiritual impact those changes can have.
Jacksonian Reform
The early national period in American history, often associated with the administration of President 
Andrew Jackson, was a period marked by political, economic, and social changes and reform. Many social 
movements arose during this time period focused on humanitarian goals and improving the quality of life 
in America for different groups. There were efforts at improving the conditions of prisons, mental 
institutions, abolitionism, religious communitarian movements, and others. Many reformers were 
involved in more than one movement, as abolitionists became women’s rights advocates, legal reformers 
261

looked at slavery, and religious revivals inspired many to make their community and the nation better 
and provided many leaders of the abolitionist movement.
One such growing movement was the increased attention to public schooling. The idea of a free public 
education went hand in hand with universal manhood suffrage, as the common man needed training and 
knowledge in order to be a 
contributing and voting member of 
the Republic.
Between 1810 and 1820 the number 
of American colleges doubled, and 
the number of primary schools grew 
at a fast rate. At the forefront of 
those advocating free public 
education was Horace Mann. He 
believed that for a republic to 
survive, an educated citizenry was 
vital and that increased education 
would mean the elimination of 
poverty and general prosperity for 
the nation. In a report to the 
Massachusetts State Board of Education in 1846 Mann argued:
"I believe in the existence of a great, immortal, immutable principle of natural law...which proves the 
absolute right to an education of every human being that comes into the world; and which, of course, 
proves the correlative duty of every government to see that the means of that education are provided 
for all…Education, then, beyond all other devices of human origin, is the great equalizer of the 
conditions of men, — the balance-wheel of the social machinery. I do not here mean that it so elevates 
the moral nature as to make men disdain and abhor the oppression of their fellow-men. This idea 
pertains to another of its attributes. But I mean that it gives each man the independence and the means 
by which he can resist the selfishness of other men. It does better than to disarm the poor of their 
hostility towards the rich: it prevents being poor.”
Over the next decades education evolved from something only available to the wealthy, through tutors 
with small groups of children, to a public compulsory education provided by local and state governments 
which would continue to expand its reach throughout the 19th century and into the 20th century. After 
the Civil War, women’s colleges emerged which began to offer higher education to women.
262

Also in this period, Temperance (anti-alcohol) societies sprung up around the country, organized to 
publicize the evils of drinking in order to protect the 
collective morality of society and families. Women were 
many of the leaders of this movement, and were also 
involved in the suffrage movement as part of the 
general effort to improve the lives of women. Groups 
such as the Women’s Christian Temperance Union 
organized rallies and helped elect candidates 
committed to stricter laws against consuming and 
selling alcohol. They advocated “temperance pledges” 
and abstinence from all liquor. Its advocates argued 
that many of society’s evils, particularly crime and poverty, 
could be traced to “demon rum” and was dangerous to the 
country as a whole. Abraham Lincoln addressed the issue in 
1842:
Turn now, to the temperance revolution. In it, we shall find a 
stronger bondage broken; a viler slavery, manumitted; a greater 
tyrant deposed. In it, more of want supplied, more disease 
healed, more sorrow assuaged. By it no orphans starving, no 
widows weeping. By it, none wounded in feeling, none injured in 
interest. …And what a noble ally this, to the cause of political 
freedom. With such an aid, its march cannot fail to be on and 
on, till every son of earth shall drink in rich fruition, the sorrow 
quenching draughts of perfect liberty…And when the victory 
shall be complete -- when there shall be neither a slave nor a 
drunkard on the earth -- how proud the title of that Land, which may truly claim to be the birth-place 
and the cradle of both those revolutions, that shall have ended in that victory. How nobly distinguished 
that People, who shall have planted, and nurtured to maturity, both the political and moral freedom of 
their species.
The battle was often drawn pitting rural, native-born Americans against urban immigrants, often colored 
by anti-immigrant sentiment. The movement continued throughout the 19th century into the Progressive 
263

period. These groups were eventually able to gain enough political strength to pass the 18th amendment 
in the early 20th century with Prohibition (which was later overturned by the 21st amendment).
The Second Great Awakening was part of this reform 
environment as well, and an integral part of the establishment 
of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. In religious 
terms the Second Great Awakening emphasized the ability of 
each person to achieve salvation through submission to Jesus 
Christ. The freedom of the will and individual understanding of 
scripture were all important in working out one’s own salvation. 
Revivalist preachers such as Charles Grandison Finney traveled 
with their dramatic message of a revival of religious devotion. 
“Revival is a renewed conviction of sin and repentance, followed 
by an intense desire to live in obedience to God. It is giving up one's will to God in deep humility,” Finney 
preached. It was in this heightened environment of religious questioning and personal salvation which 
moved Joseph Smith to find answers praying in the Sacred Grove.
The Great Society of the 1960s
Despite the efforts of Jacksonian reforms and the reform movements that followed, problems of poverty, 
access to quality education, and poor living conditions continued. In 1962 socialist intellectual and writer 
Michael Harrington published The Other America which criticized the lack of public and government 
attention to the cycle of poverty and those outside the middle class. “The poor are increasingly slipping 
out of the very experience and consciousness of the nation…the development of the American city has 
removed poverty from the living, emotional experience of millions upon millions of middle-class 
Americans. Living out in the suburbs it is easy to assume that ours is, indeed, an affluent society,” he 
wrote. “Only the larger society, with its help and resources, can really make it possible for these people to help 
themselves.”
Political pressure in this environment of increased attention to Civil Rights and economic inequality 
fostered support of government efforts and programs. It was spearheaded by President Lyndon Johnson 
and moved forward in the similar spirit of previous reform traditions. It envisioned a “Great Society” 
without poverty or discrimination in which all Americans enjoyed equal educational and job 
opportunities. The faith in government programs, moving beyond the provisions of the New Deal, was a 
bold domestic agenda, taking on a federal responsibility for the problems of housing, income, 
employment, and health. In the following 1964 address, President Johnson outlined his program, and 
connected his vision to earlier ideas of community and the “pursuit of happiness.”
264

The Great Society, Lyndon B. Johnson, Address at University of 
Michigan, May 1964
The purpose of protecting the life of our nation and preserving the liberty of our citizens is to pursue the 
happiness of our people. Our success in that pursuit is the test of our success as a nation.
For a century we labored to settle and to subdue a continent. For half a century we called upon unbounded 
invention and untiring industry to create an order of plenty for all of our people.
The challenge of the next half century is whether we have the wisdom to use that wealth to enrich and elevate 
our national life, and to advance the quality of our American civilization.
Your imagination and your initiative, and your indignation will determine whether we build a society where 
progress is the servant of our needs, or a society where old values and new visions are buried under unbridled 
growth. For in your time we have the opportunity to move not only toward the rich society and the powerful 
society, but upward to the Great Society.
The Great Society rests on abundance and liberty for all. It demands an end to poverty and racial injustice, to 
which we are totally committed in our time. But that is just the beginning.
…The solution to these problems does not rest on a massive program in Washington, nor can it rely solely on 
the strained resources of local authority. They require us to create new concepts of cooperation, a creative 
federalism, between the national capital and the leaders of local communities…. Those who came to this land 
sought to build more than just a new country. They sought a new world. So I have come here today to your 
campus to say that you can make their vision our reality.
Johnson set forth an array of reform legislation rivaling the days of the New Deal. There were four 
general areas of these programs. The first was a ”War on Poverty” which raised the minimum wage, 
enacted programs to train poorer Americans for new and better jobs, created a cabinet-level Department 
of Housing and Urban Development and instituted federal housing programs. The second was education; 
student loans, scholarships, and grants were increased to allow more students to attend college. 
Programs such as Head Start began and federal funding of education increased with the Elementary and 
Secondary Education Act. Third, in the area of racial inequality, Congress passed the Civil Rights Act of 
1964 and the Voting Rights Act of 1965.
Johnson issued an executive order requiring government contractors to ensure that job applicants and 
employees were not discriminated against with “affirmative action.” These measures brought Johnson 
into conflict with his fellow Southern Democrats, but his experience in Congress helped him push 
through legislation without southern support. And finally, Medicare, established in 1965, extended 
medical insurance to older Americans under the Social Security system. Congress also passed the 
265

Medicaid Act of 1968 to provide for the medical expenses of those below the poverty line. This was not 
universal health care, but it was the first step in providing money for medical services to those who could 
not afford it.
Many of these Great Society programs continue today and have been expanded and enlarged. It can be 
argued that they have both been successes and failures. Many of the programs have helped lift people 
out of poverty, increased access to education, provided a safety net for those unable to provide for 
themselves, and increased awareness of social, racial, and economic inequities. However, poverty still 
remains, racial inequality is still entrenched in some areas of the country, and many argue that a spirit of 
entitlement has been fostered as the responsibilities of federal and state governments have increased. 
Funding entitlement programs remains a political football. For President Johnson, many of his bolder 
creations were undermined by his other project during his presidency - the Vietnam War. Eroding 
support for that war weakened his congressional power and took funds from those programs.
The Youth Rebellion
During this same time period, large groups of young people, disenchanted with the Vietnam War, and 
attuned to the perceived systemic wrongs of the American system, began to organize and protest. The 
baby boom generation was the largest and best educated cohort in the history of the United States. 
Between 1946 and 1964, 76 million babies were born. This generation was the first to experience the 
culture of television, consumer power, rock and roll, and the creation of the word “teenager.” Their 
parents had grown up during the Great Depression and World War II, but they were growing up in a time 
of rapid economic growth and opportunity.
Yet many in this generation felt great anxiety about the status of the world, and the conformity of the 
suburbs they lived in. Highly educated youth, with unprecedented leisure time available, combined with 
the growth of mass culture in an atmosphere of rapid social change proved an explosive mix. 
Generationally powerful, many baby boomers questioned aspects of post- war society, including 
materialism, the war in Vietnam, racial injustice, and gender inequalities.
While the vast majority of young people did not protest or organize, the influence of such movements 
cannot be overlooked, and their rejection of parental and societal traditions would be far-reaching. Those 
protesting were often referred to as a “counterculture,” as their ideas and goals were counter to 
mainstream culture.
Many students organized on college campuses. One such group was the Students for a Democratic 
Society, founded in 1960. Inspired by the Civil Rights Movement, college students began to organize 
politically, and were radical in their rhetoric and goals. In 1962 they issued a statement in Port Huron, 
266

Michigan, calling for “participatory democracy” - direct individual involvement in the political 
controversies of the day and explained their disillusionment with the world they were inheriting.
The Port Huron Statement, Students for a Democratic Society, 1962
We are people of this generation, bred in at least modest comfort, housed now in universities, looking 
uncomfortably to the world we inherit.
When we were kids the United States was the wealthiest and strongest country in the world…Freedom and 
equality for each individual, government of, by, and for the people -- these American values we found good, 
principles by which we could live as men.
As we grew, however, our comfort was penetrated by events too troubling to dismiss. First, the permeating and 
victimizing fact of human degradation, symbolized by the Southern struggle against racial bigotry, compelled 
most of us from silence to activism. Second, the enclosing fact of the Cold War, symbolized by the presence of 
the Bomb, brought awareness that we ourselves, and our friends, and millions of abstract "others" we knew 
more directly because of our common peril, might die at any time. … we began to see complicated and 
disturbing paradoxes in our surrounding America. The declaration "all men are created equal . . . rang hollow 
before the facts of Negro life in the South and the big cities of the North….
Not only did tarnish appear on our image of American virtue, not only did disillusion occur when the hypocrisy 
of American ideals was discovered, but we began to sense that what we had originally seen as the American 
Golden Age was actually the decline of an era.
Another youth protest movement occurred on the University of California Berkeley campus in 1964. This 
was the first of the 1960s campus student movements to make headlines all over the world. Students 
protested the impersonality of the modern university, questioned university requirements, restrictions on 
student political activities, and dormitory rules. Many leaders of this movement had also been involved in 
civil rights protests in the South, initiating many students into radical politics. The most dramatic 
moments of the protest was a takeover of parts of campus, including common areas and administration 
buildings, borrowing many of the sit-in tactics of the Civil Rights Movement. One of the leaders, Mario 
Savio, inspired young people at one such protest with these words, “There is a time when the operation 
of the machine becomes so odious, makes you so sick at heart, that you can't take part; you can't even 
passively take part, and you've got to put your bodies upon the gears and upon the wheels, upon the 
levers, upon all the apparatus, and you've got to make it stop. And you've got to indicate to the people 
who run it, to the people who own it, that unless you're free, the machine will be prevented from working 
at all!”
267

As the 1960s progressed, the youth movement gained cultural power, as the archetype of the “hippie” 
emerged, striking out at social norms in dress and grooming standards, sexual morality, and increased 
drug use. Youth culture developed its own popular music and language. As Bob Dylan wrote in the 
popular song “The Times They Are A-Changin’”
Come gather 'round people Wherever you roam
And admit that the waters Around you have grown And accept it that soon
You'll be drenched to the bone. If your time to you
Is worth savin'
Then you better start swimmin' Or you'll sink like a stone
For the times they are a-changin'.
Direct protest with marches and rallies continued. The escalation of the Vietnam War encouraged even 
more radicalized student movements, as the draft impacted this generation as the decade wore on. The 
conflict divided America, and proved to be a disastrous piece of Cold War foreign policy for both 
countries. In hindsight, the actions of student protesters often seem valid and justified.
The legacies of the 1960s continue to influence us today, in changed morals and definitions of family, the 
questioning of gender roles, the increased acceptance of casual drug use and sexual activity as part of 
American culture, and the sense of moral relativism in entertainment and beyond. However, the 
questions raised by many in the youth rebellion have also contributed to the political conversation, 
increased attention to American hypocrisy as it fails to live up to its ideals, and influenced the 
environment on college campuses and the power of young people to influence, for good and ill, the 
American spirit of reform.
The Rise of Consumer Culture
Along with political changes, economic reforms, and generational shifts, the postwar focus on consumer 
culture was another evolution in American society. The rise of big business during industrialization after 
the Civil War increased the number of consumer goods available and the reach of mass industries, and 
the 1920s saw the rise of advertising and media influence with radio and film. This growth was somewhat 
hampered by The Great Depression and World War II, but during the war advertisers had focused on the 
idea that freedom and victory would mean new consumer opportunities, for example “after victory 
kitchens.”
268

In 1947 the United States had by far the world's most productive and prosperous economy, with pent-up 
consumer demand one of the drivers of its success. In the 1950s, with only 6% of the world's population, 
and the rest of the world facing the task of rebuilding from unprecedented wartime destruction, the 
United States produced 50% of the world's manufactured goods, 57% of its steel, 62% of its oil, and over 
80% of its cars. The growth of suburban housing (85% of the new housing was built in the new suburbs), 
the expansion and prosperity of the middle-class through increased educational opportunities of the G.I. 
Bill, and high wages in manufacturing fed the consumer market. A new American dream lifestyle, a fusion 
of need and desire, focused on baby boom families. With the emergence of television, and the creation of 
new products to sell for all these new households, the amount businesses spent on advertising increased 
400%.
Consumer culture and the changes wrought by technology have only increased in the last 60 years. It now 
defines the world we live in. “Planned obsolescence” forces consumers to buy new products on a 
consistent basis, and advertising promotes the need for the newest and brightest technological toy. The 
majority of Americans buy much of their consumer lifestyle on credit. On the one hand, this mass 
consumerism helps drive much of our prosperity through wages and business growth. Technology has 
enabled miraculous gains and connections throughout the world, many of which have been used to 
facilitate the teaching of the gospel. However, there are real costs to consumer culture, many of which 
are paid by workers in other countries who toil under terrible conditions in sweatshops to make cheaper 
products. And there are spiritual dangers. We have received wise counsel as members of the church 
about how we can live in this world and remain righteous, and keep focused on things of eternal value 
even in the midst of the worldly “Babylon” that confronts us daily. The following conference address from 
2006 deals with some of these issues and offers some guidance on how to live in the culture and time we 
are in.
“Zion in the Midst of Babylon” - Elder David R. Stone - April 2006
Last summer, my wife and I had the opportunity to travel to San Diego, California, and see 
Shakespeare’s Macbeth at the Old Globe Theatre. We saw two performances, because our daughter 
Carolyn was playing the part of one of the three witches in that play. Of course, we were delighted to see 
her in the play and even more delighted when, at a dramatic moment, she said those famous lines:
“By the pricking of my thumbs, / Something wicked this way comes” (act 4, scene 1, lines 40–41). When I 
heard that, I thought how useful it would be to have an early-warning system which would tell us about 
the approach of evil and allow us to be prepared for it. Evil is coming toward us, whether or not we have 
an early-warning system.
269

On a later occasion, my wife and I were driving cross-country one night and were approaching a great 
city. As we came over the hills and saw the bright lights on the horizon, I nudged my wife awake and 
said, “Behold the city of Babylon!” Of course, there is no particular city today which personifies Babylon. 
Babylon was, in the time of ancient Israel, a city which had become sensual, decadent, and corrupt. The 
principal building in the city was a temple to a false god, which we often refer to as Bel or Baal.
However, that sensuality, corruption, and decadence, and the worshipping of false gods are to be seen 
in many cities, great and small, scattered across the globe. As the Lord has said: “They seek not the Lord 
to establish his righteousness, but every man walketh in his own way, and after the image of his own 
god, whose image is in the likeness of the world” (D&C 1:16).
Too many of the people of the world have come to resemble the Babylon of old by walking in their own 
ways, and following a god “whose image is in the likeness of the world.” One of the greatest challenges 
we will face is to be able to live in that world but somehow not be of that world. We have to create Zion 
in the midst of Babylon.
“Zion in the midst of Babylon.” What a luminous and incandescent phrase, as a light shining in the midst 
of spiritual darkness. What a concept to hold close to our hearts, as we see Babylon becoming more 
widespread. We see Babylon in our cities; we see Babylon in our communities; we see Babylon 
everywhere.
And with the encroachment of Babylon, we have to create Zion in the midst of it. We should not allow 
ourselves to be engulfed by the culture which surrounds us.We seldom realize the extent to which we are 
a product of the culture of our place and time. During the days of ancient Israel, the people of the Lord 
were an island of the one true God, surrounded by an ocean of idolatry. The waves of that ocean 
crashed incessantly upon the shores of Israel. Despite the commandment to make no graven image and 
bow down before it, Israel seemingly could not help itself, influenced by the culture of the place and 
time. Over and over again—despite the prohibition of the Lord, despite what prophet and priest had 
said—Israel went seeking after strange gods and bowed down before them.
How could Israel have forgotten the Lord, who brought them out of Egypt? They were constantly 
pressured by what was popular in the ambience in which they lived. What an insidious thing is this 
culture amidst which we live. It permeates our environment, and we think we are being reasonable and 
logical when, all too often, we have been molded by the ethos, what the Germans call the zeitgeist, or 
the culture of our place and time. Because my wife and I have had the opportunity to live in 10 different 
countries, we have seen the effect of the ethos on behavior. Customs which are perfectly acceptable in 
one culture are viewed as unacceptable in another; language which is polite in some places is viewed as 
abhorrent in others. People in every culture move within a cocoon of self-satisfied self-deception, fully 
convinced that the way they see things is the way things really are.
270

Our culture tends to determine what foods we like, how we dress, what constitutes polite behavior, what 
sports we should follow, what our taste in music should be, the importance of education, and our 
attitudes toward honesty. It also influences men as to the importance of recreation or religion, 
influences women about the priority of career or childbearing, and has a powerful effect on how we 
approach procreation and moral issues. All too often, we are like puppets on a string, as our culture 
determines what is “cool.”
There is, of course, a zeitgeist to which we should pay attention, and that is the ethos of the Lord, the 
culture of the people of God. As Peter states it, “But ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an 
holy nation, a peculiar people; that ye should shew forth the praises of him who hath called you out of 
darkness into his marvelous light” (1 Pet. 2:9). It is the ethos of those who keep the Lord’s 
commandments, walk in His ways, and “live by every word that proceedeth forth from the mouth of 
God” (D&C 84:44). If that makes us peculiar, so be it.
My involvement with the building of the Manhattan temple gave me the opportunity to be in the temple 
quite often prior to the dedication. It was wonderful to sit in the celestial room and be there in perfect 
silence, without a single sound to be heard coming from the busy New York streets outside. How was it 
possible that the temple could be so reverently silent when the hustle and bustle of the metropolis was 
just a few yards away?
The answer was in the construction of the temple. The temple was built within the walls of an existing 
building, and the inner walls of the temple were connected to the outer walls at only a very few junction 
points. That is how the temple (Zion) limited the effects of Babylon, or the world outside. There may be a 
lesson here for us. We can create the real Zion among us by limiting the extent to which Babylon will 
influence our lives.
When, about 600 years B.C., Nebuchadnezzar came from Babylon and conquered Judah, he carried 
away the people of the Lord. Nebuchadnezzar selected some of the young men for special education 
and training. Among them were Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah. They were to be the favored 
ones among the young people brought to Babylon. The king’s servant instructed them that they were to 
eat of the king’s meat and drink of the king’s wine.
Let us clearly understand the pressures that the four young men were under. They had been carried 
away as captives by a conquering power and were in the household of a king who held the power of life 
or death over them. And yet Daniel and his brothers refused to do that which they believed to be wrong, 
however much the Babylonian culture believed it to be right. And for that fidelity and courage, the Lord 
blessed them and “gave them knowledge and skill in all learning and wisdom” (Dan. 1:17).
271

Seduced by our culture, we often hardly recognize our idolatry, as our strings are pulled by that which is 
popular in the Babylonian world. Indeed, as the poet Wordsworth said: “The world is too much with us” 
(“The World Is Too Much with Us; Late and Soon,” in The Complete Poetical Works of William 
Wordsworth [1924], 353). In his first epistle, John writes: “I have written unto you … because ye are 
strong, and the word of God abideth in you, and ye have overcome the wicked one. “Love not the world, 
neither the things that are in the world” (1 Jn. 2:14–15).
We do not need to adopt the standards, the mores, and the morals of Babylon. We can create Zion in 
the midst of Babylon. We can have our own standards for music and literature and dance and film and 
language. We can have our own standards for dress and deportment, for politeness and respect. We can 
live in accordance with the Lord’s moral laws. We can limit how much of Babylon we allow into our 
homes by the media of communication.
We can live as a Zion people, if we wish to. Will it be hard? Of course it will, for the waves of Babylonian 
culture crash incessantly against our shores. Will it take courage? Of course it will. We have always been 
entranced by tales of courage of those who faced fearsome odds and overcame. Courage is the basis 
and foundation for all of our other virtues; the lack of courage diminishes every other virtue that we 
have. If we are to have Zion in the midst of Babylon, we will need courage.
Have you ever imagined that, when it came to the test, you would perform some act of bravery? I know I 
did, as a boy. I imagined that someone was in peril and that, at the risk of my own life, I saved him. Or
in some dangerous confrontation with a fearsome opponent, I had the courage to overcome. Such are 
our youthful imaginations! Almost 70 years of life have taught me that those heroic opportunities are 
few and far between, if they come at all.
But the opportunities to stand for that which is right—when the pressures are subtle and when even our 
friends are encouraging us to give in to the idolatry of the times—those come along far more frequently. 
No photographer is there to record the heroism, no journalist will splash it across the newspaper’s front 
page. Just in the quiet contemplation of our conscience, we will know that we faced the test of courage: 
Zion or Babylon?
Make no mistake about it: much of Babylon, if not most of it, is evil. And we will not have the pricking of 
our thumbs to warn us. But wave after wave is coming, crashing against our shores. Will it be Zion, or 
will it be Babylon? If Babylon is the city of the world, Zion is the city of God.
The Lord has said of Zion: “Zion cannot be built up unless it is by the principles of the law of the 
celestial kingdom” (D&C 105:5) and, “For this is Zion—the pure in heart” (D&C 97:21).
Wherever we are, whatever city we may live in, we can build our own Zion by the principles of the 
celestial kingdom and ever seek to become the pure in heart. Zion is the beautiful, and the Lord holds it 
272

in His own hands. Our homes can be places which are a refuge and protection, as Zion is. We do not 
need to become as puppets in the hands of the culture of the place and time. We can be courageous 
and can walk in the Lord’s paths and follow His footsteps. And if we do, we will be called Zion, and we 
will be the people of the Lord. I pray that we will be strengthened to resist the onslaught of Babylon and 
that we can create Zion in our homes and our communities—indeed, that we may have “Zion in the 
midst of Babylon.”
We seek Zion because it is the habitation of our Lord, who is Jesus Christ, our Savior and Redeemer. In 
Zion and from Zion, His luminous and incandescent light will shine forth, and He will rule forever. I bear 
witness that He lives and loves us and will watch over us.
This devotional talk by Elder Bateman covers the time period of this lesson, and examines the interesting 
connections between technological change, social reform, and the restoration of the gospel since the 
time of Joseph Smith. He argues that this is not an accidental convergence, but part of the divine plan. 
He also testifies of the importance of both a temporal and spiritual education, as we confront the everchanging times we live in and wrestle with opposition in all things.
“Nothing Shall Be Withheld” - Elder Merrill J. Bateman Brigham Young 
University–Idaho Devotional - May 22, 2007
In a dank, dark dungeon during one of Joseph Smith’s bleakest hours, the Prophet pleaded with the Lord 
to make Himself known and to remember His suffering saints. Listen to Joseph’s pleadings: “O God, 
where art thou? . . . How long shall thy hand be stayed, . . . behold from the eternal heavens the wrongs 
of thy people? . . . Yea, O Lord, how long shall they suffer these wrongs and unlawful oppressions, . . . O 
Lord God Almighty, . . . stretch forth thy hand; . . .
Remember thy suffering saints.” (D&C 121:1-6.) In response to Joseph’s prayer came one of the most 
remarkable revelations of this dispensation, the 121st Section of the Doctrine and Covenants. First, 
Joseph was told that his adversity and afflictions would be “but a small moment” (D&C 121:7).
All Knowledge to be Revealed
And then the Lord told Joseph that great knowledge was about to be revealed to the earth through the 
power of the Holy Ghost. The scripture states: 
“God shall give unto you knowledge by his Holy Spirit . . . that has not been revealed since the world was 
until now” (D&C 121:26). The Lord went on to say that it would be “A time to come in the which nothing 
shall be withheld, . . .
273

All thrones and dominions, principalities and powers, shall be revealed . . . And also, if there be bounds 
set to the heavens or to the seas, or to the dry land, or to the sun, moon, or stars—All the times of their 
revolutions, all the appointed days, months, and years, . . . and all their glories, laws, and set times, shall 
be revealed in the days of the dispensation of the fulness of times” (D&C 121:28-31).
The Lord makes clear that in the last days, the dispensation of the fulness of times, all things will be 
revealed. (See D&C 101:23-34.) All knowledge includes the laws that govern the earth as well as those 
which are spiritual in nature. The Apostle Paul prophesied 1800 years earlier “That in the dispensation of 
the fulness of times” the Lord will “gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and 
which are on earth” (Ephesians 1:10).
One might interpret “all things in Christ” to refer only to spiritual laws, but it is more since the great 
Jehovah made “all things” (John 1:3). The Apostle Peter also spoke of a period of “refreshing” coincident 
with a “restitution of all things” which would precede the Second Coming of the Lord (Acts 3:19, 21). It is 
true that we understand these apostolic prophecies to refer to the Restoration of the gospel in the last 
days. But the Lord’s statement to Joseph Smith in Liberty Jail indicates that more than spiritual truths will 
be revealed. He states that knowledge pertaining not only to the heavens, but also to the seas, the earth, 
thrones, dominions, etc. will be made known. On an earlier occasion, the Lord revealed to the Prophet 
Joseph that “all things . . . are spiritual” (D&C 29:34). All laws and knowledge have a spiritual purpose. For 
this reason the Lord has instructed us to become educated in temporal as well as spiritual things.
Doctrine and Covenants section 88 states that we should “be instructed more perfectly in theory, in 
principle, in doctrine, in the law of the gospel, in all things . . . that are expedient for [us] to understand; “Of 
things both in heaven and in the earth, and under the earth; things which have been, things which are, things 
which must shortly come to pass; things . . . at home, things . . . abroad; the wars and the perplexities of the 
nations.” (D&C 88:78-79.) From this section one understands that secular knowledge is also important to 
us and the Lord tells us why: “That ye may be prepared in all things when I shall send you . . . to magnify 
[your] calling” (D&C 88:80).
Church educational institutions have a dual purpose: to provide both a temporal and a spiritual 
education. Temporally, BYU-Idaho prepares you to provide for yourself and your family. It prepares you 
to make a contribution to the communities in which you live. Spiritually, it educates you in the laws of the 
Kingdom so that you can contribute to the establishment of the Church. Ultimately, of course, the 
purpose of this educational opportunity is to bring you to Christ.
The Pattern for Revealing Spiritual Truths
274

As Latter-day Saints, we understand the pattern by which a new dispensation is initiated and spiritual 
truths are revealed. It begins with the Lord calling a prophet, angels are then sent to instruct him (see 
Moroni 7:29-32). Others are called to assist. The priesthood is transmitted to them with its keys and 
powers. Through the priesthood, the Gift of the Holy Ghost is given as a personal guide and to establish 
the Church. A book is often provided which contains the fulness of the gospel and serves as a witness of 
the Lord and His work (see Exodus 24:12, Ezekiel 2:9-10, 1 Nephi 1:11). The calling of Joseph Smith was 
not the first to follow this pattern. The callings of Moses, Ezekiel, Lehi, and, undoubtedly other prophets 
followed these steps. Even John the Revelator’s commission to write the history of the earth and its 
dispensations included an appearance from the Lord, an angel to guide him, and a book (see Revelations 
1, 5:1-2).
The Source of Temporal Knowledge
Now, what about temporal knowledge? How is it revealed and to whom? It is clear that secular inventions 
and innovations generally do not come through prophets. Their mission is special as they focus on 
spiritual things. However, secular knowledge has the same source as does spiritual truths. God is 
omniscient and the source of all truth. The Savior said, “I am the way, the truth, and the light” (John 14:6). 
The Light of Christ is given to every man and woman and anyone who responds to the Light may be a 
conduit for secular knowledge.
The Burst of Secular Knowledge Coincident with The Restoration
It is apparent that secular knowledge has flowered since the time of Joseph Smith, that the Lord has been 
flooding the earth with temporal knowledge as well as spiritual. Let me illustrate the explosion of 
temporal knowledge with two statements, the first from Stephen E. Ambrose’s book, Undaunted Courage, 
and the second William J. Bernstein’s The Birth of Plenty. Speaking of the early 1800s, Ambrose wrote:
“A critical fact in the world of 1801 was that nothing moved faster than the speed of a horse. No human 
being, no manufactured item, no bushel of wheat, no side of beef, no letter, no information, no idea,
order or instruction of any kind moved faster. Nothing had moved faster, and, as far as Jefferson’s 
contemporaries were able to tell, nothing ever would.”99
The horse had been the mainstay of land transportation since the dawn of history. As far as anyone knew 
in the early 1800s, it would remain that way. It took Thomas Jefferson ten days to travel from Monticello 
to Philadelphia. In less than 50 years, with the advent of the steam locomotive, the trip was cut to one 
day. The invention of the telegraph in 1837 brought instantaneous communication across the globe that 
99 Stephen E. Ambrose, Undaunted Courage, (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1996), 52.
275

abruptly altered the political, social and economic affairs of nations. And these inventions were just the 
beginning.100
In describing the dramatic changes that occurred in the first half of the 19th century, William Bernstein 
writes: 
“When we look at the [facts], it becomes crystal clear that something happened … in the early nineteenth 
century. Before then, the rate of improvement in the lot of mankind was small and stuttering, and after, 
substantial and steady … Until approximately 1820, per capita world economic growth – the single best 
way of measuring human material progress– registered near zero … Then, not long after 1820, 
prosperity began flowing in an ever- increasing torrent; with each successive generation, the life of the 
son became observably more comfortable, informed, and predictable than that of the father.”101
The pattern of world economic well being described by Bernstein is illustrated in a graph developed by a 
Scottish economist, Angus Maddison. Maddison graduated from Cambridge University in 1948 and, for 
the next 30 years, served as an economist for one of the world’s largest international aid organizations. 
During this time he became fascinated with the problems of the developing world and the differences in 
wealth between rich and poor nations. In 1978 he accepted a professorship at a Dutch university and for 
the next 20 years developed a model of world economic growth for the last 2000 years. The results were 
both stunning and unexpected..the economic wellbeing of the average individual, measured as real per 
capita output or income, “did not change at all during the first millennium after the birth of Christ. Over the 
next 800 years, between A.D. 1000 and A.D. 1800, things did not get much better.”102 There were few 
innovations and the improvement prior to 1800 was marginal.
The real progress begins in 1820 when the graph suddenly turns upward and begins a long steady climb 
to unprecedented heights. Maddison indicates that the exact timing of the turn is somewhat arbitrary. 
American data suggests that it may have been a few years before 1820 while British data suggests a date 
as late as 1830. Regardless, it is clear that sometime during the first half of the nineteenth century, world 
economic growth took off and continued upward despite wars, famines, and social strife.6 Bernstein 
describes Maddison’s findings with the following words: “Beginning around 1820, the pace of economic 
advance picked up noticeably, making the world a better place to live in. What happened? An explosion in 
technological innovation the likes of which had never before been seen.”103
100 William J. Bernstein, The Birth of Plenty, (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2004), 2.
101 Ibid. 3-4.
102 Ibid. 18-19.
103 Ibid. 15.
276

The Foundations for The Explosion of Secular Knowledge in The 1800s
What caused the sudden change in economic wellbeing? It was an explosion in technological innovation 
unlike anything the world had seen. It was an explosion of ideas and knowledge in an environment that 
allowed the innovations to take hold. During the period of the enlightenment, and even before, the Lord 
prepared the earth not only for the return of the gospel, but the reception and dispersion of secular 
knowledge that had never before been revealed (see D&C 121:26, 28-29). Four environmental 
foundations necessary for the use of the technological innovations were put in place during the 
centuries prior to 1820. They included laws that secured property rights, safe havens for scientific 
rationalism, efficient capital markets, and the bases for improved transportation and 
communications.104
Prior to the 1700s there were very few technological discoveries. The major innovations were the threecrop rotational system, the horseshoe and horse collar, the water mill, the windmill, the four-wheeled 
cart and the printing press. The first economically viable steam engine came into existence in the late 
1700s. The steam engine was important because it provided the foundation for the nineteenth century 
to escape from the limitations of animal muscle, wind, and water. It provided the power that led to 
modern manufacturing and the steamship and railroad. The barriers to the use of electricity for 
communication were finally overcome in the early part of the nineteenth century. Thus the foundations 
were laid for the explosion of knowledge that began with the openings of the heavens in 1820.
One could make a long list of the scientific discoveries that followed 1820. These discoveries brought 
more change in the lives of people between 1825 and 1875 than at any other time in history. Railroads 
and steamships brought swift and reliable travel for the first time.
Roads were macadamized which tied nations and continents together. Factories were mechanized into 
highly productive units. The telegraph brought instantaneous global communications. The 
instantaneous flow of information eliminated great inefficiencies in world markets and increased 
productivity. Cars, telephones, airplanes and computers followed. Advances in medicine improved 
health and extended life. Eventually, rockets became a reliable means of extraterrestrial transportation 
for human beings and satellites.
For a few moments, I will examine some of the key innovations of the last 50 years and their 
implications for the spread of the gospel. In doing so, I appreciate being able to use some materials 
developed by Brother Gerrit Gong of BYU and Clint Melander at Church headquarters.
104 Ibid. Chapters 2-5.
277

The first innovation is the satellite. The Russians launched the first satellite into orbit on Friday, October 
4, 1957, the first day of October general conference that year. The United States followed in 1958. To 
date, eight countries have independently launched satellites into orbit on indigenously developed launch 
vehicles. In addition to Russia and the U.S., other countries include France, Japan, China, the United 
Kingdom, India and Israel. The Church began using satellites for communications 25 years ago. Today, 
the Church leases transponders on six satellites that provide downlinks to more than 2,900 stakes, 
districts and missions around the globe. The satellite coverage allows 87 percent of Church membership 
to receive a signal. It will not be long before the other 13 percent are also within range. Satellites have 
allowed the Church to develop a global communications network that is extraordinarily important for a 
worldwide Church. This allows members to receive general conference and Church leaders to 
communicate with other leaders across the globe.
Last week, Elder Scott and I held a videoconference with the Area Presidency in West Africa regarding 
missionary work, the strengthening of stakes and temple worship. This coming Sunday, President 
Monson, Elder Holland, Sister Lant and I will be part of a satellite stake conference broadcast for all of 
the stakes in Samoa and Tahiti. Satellites have become an important medium for communicating with 
the members of the Church.
The Internet is a network of networks created from computers and cables that stretches across the 
globe. It delivers packets of information anywhere in the world, generally well under a second. It began 
in 1969 when communications were established between UCLA and the Stanford Research Institute. In 
1990, CSNET came into being which linked universities in North America and then Europe. In 1995, 
popular interest exploded as the U.S. Government transferred control of the Internet to independent 
organizations.
In 1991, British computer scientist, Tim Berners-Lee, created the World Wide Web and posted the first 
Web site on August 6. 1991. The World Wide Web consists of the documents, sounds, videos and 
collections of data that ride on the Internet. Access to the Internet is highest in Japan at approximately 
90 percent. North America is second at 70 percent. Penetration in Australia and Oceania is 54 percent 
and Europe follows with 39 percent. Asian penetration is eleven percent. The dominant language, of 
course, is global English.
The vast majority of searches regarding the Church are under the term “Mormon” rather than under the 
official Church name (about 23 million hits per day). The majority of the hits are sympathetic in nature 
i.e., most hits represent a positive interest in the Church. Still, there is a significant interest and number 
of hits directed to negative or even antagonistic information.
The Internet is a missionary tool. Many individuals use the net to find out information on the Church. 
Often, after the first meeting with the missionaries, investigators will go to the Internet to learn more. 
278

The Internet is also a key source of communications not only for the general populace but also for the 
Church. E-mail is a key method of communicating with leaders across the earth. The Internet is also a 
source for receiving general conference and other broadcasts.
[Now we turn to] the pervasiveness of electronic equipment. According to a recent Business Week 
magazine article, “human beings produced more transistors than they did grains of rice” in 2005.105
Those transistors powered 2 billion cell phones, 1.5 billion televisions, 820 million personal computers, 
190 million Game Boys, 70 million iPods, 50 million PDAs and 3.2 million BlackBerrys. Given Geoffrey 
Moore’s law that the power of semiconductor chips will double roughly every 18 to 24 months, 
electronic devices will become even smaller, less expensive and more capable. Access to information will 
become more personal, available anytime, and anywhere.
Not only are electronic devices proliferating, but there is also a convergence. Last year, mobile phone 
manufacturers shipped 850 million phones to global customers. The current cost for a regular unit is 
about $30. The industry goal is to reduce that cost to $20 in the near future. The first mobile phone 
produced by Motorola, nicknamed “The Brick” weighed 2 pounds and cost
$3,995. It was nothing more than a wireless phone. The new Apple iPhone weighs 4.8 ounces and offers 
voice, multimedia, and Internet on a touch screen. It will cost between $400 and $600 depending on 
storage capacity.
Moore’s law fuels the technology convergence that is taking place. As the picture illustrates, devices 
conveying video, voice, data, and multi-media are converging to a personal, portable, affordable 
handheld device that almost everyone, everywhere will own or be able to access. Can you think of 
Church uses for such a device? It will be useful for missionary work, family history searches, 
communications, education, and many other needs. I also know that Satan—who has already found 
many uses for the various devices—will continue to tempt people with material that he places on the 
new ones.
Now, may we return to the beginning. In a dank, dark dungeon called Liberty Jail, the Lord revealed to 
the Prophet Joseph Smith that He would unleash “knowledge by [the] holy spirit . . . that has not been 
revealed since the world was even until now” (D&C 121:25).
Moreover, the knowledge would not only pertain to the spiritual realm but also include knowledge 
pertaining to the earth (see D&C 121:25, 29-31). From the time of Christ until 1820, Angus Maddison’s 
data supports the notion that the heavens were almost sealed during the dark ages. Finally, a small 
stream of light began to emerge between 1500 and 1800. And then Maddison says something 
105 Business Week, June, 2006, 27.
279

happened. The switch was turned on and a flood of knowledge pierced men’s minds beginning about 
1820.
Brothers and sisters, you are living the miracle, the promise made by the Lord to His prophet 170 years 
ago. It is interesting that the world is just beginning to understand what has happened, but still does not 
perceive the Source. The technological inventions and discoveries of the last 170 years are a clear 
witness that our Father in Heaven and His Son deliver on Their promises. They control the universe. They 
know the pace and the extent of the discoveries needed for the gospel to reach every nation, kindred, 
tongue and people.
I testify to you that the gospel of Jesus Christ was restored through the Prophet Joseph Smith and that 
President Gordon B. Hinckley has all of the priesthood keys necessary to save and exalt you and me. I 
testify that the Savior performed the Atonement so that our shortcomings will not limit us if we exercise 
faith in Him, repent, and partake of the ordinances and covenants associated with His work. Finally, the 
Lord is the Source of all truth including the marvelous scientific discoveries and inventions that have 
improved mankind’s lot during the last 200 years. May our testimonies of Him deepen and may we 
enjoy the power of His Holy Spirit in our lives is my prayer in the name of Jesus Christ, amen.