Week 12: American Foreign Policy
The United States has faced many challenges in conducting its foreign policy as a democratic republic. 
There has been a desire to conduct internal affairs on the basis of virtue, justice, fairness, and 
“republican” principles, as well as a desire to conduct external affairs— foreign policy relations with other 
nations—on the same principles and ideals that govern domestic concerns. But that has never been easy 
in a world of dictators, secret deals, power politics, intrigue, aggression, and national interests that 
sometimes conflict with those ideals. Americans have also seen themselves as truly unique in the history 
of the world with a desire and responsibility to share the political and economic benefits that Americans 
enjoy. At the same time, Americans have been concerned over the ethics of this “missionary” attitude and 
the chances of success of exporting American ideals to countries and peoples with different principles 
and cultures. What follows is a very brief overview which demonstrates some of the dilemmas of 
America’s foreign policy and the roles in which a sense of mission, imperialism, nationalism, and 
militarism have played in influencing that policy.
Since colonial times Americans have 
exhibited a sense of idealism and 
mission. The early Puritans wanted to 
reform the Church of England and 
create a new colony that was a “city 
upon a hill.” This sense of mission 
carried over into the revolution for 
independence from England, and the 
idea that this new nation would stand 
for democratic and republican 
principles as an example to the world. 
In the early years after independence, 
however, American foreign policy 
revolved around strict isolation and 
neutrality, avoiding political or military alliances with foreign nations, especially in regard to political and 
military relations with European nations.
Commercial relations were acceptable as long as Americans were not pulled into the complexity of 
European affairs and rivalries. George Washington set this policy during his presidency by remaining a 
neutral bystander to the military conflicts of Europe and focusing on the internal affairs of the United 
States.
239

In his Farewell Address in 1796, Washington outlined the benefits of neutrality towards Europe and 
America’s unique destiny and place in the world.
George Washington, Farewell Address, 1796
. . . Excessive partiality for one foreign nation, and excessive dislike of another, cause those whom they 
actuate to see danger only on one side, and serve to veil and even second the arts of influence on the 
other. . .
The great rule of conduct for us, in regard to foreign Nations, is, in extending our commercial relations, 
to have with them as little Political connection as possible.—So far as we have already formed 
engagements, let them be fulfilled with perfect good faith. —Here let us stop.
Europe has a set of primary interests, which to us have none, or a very remote relation.
—Hence she must be engaged in frequent controversies, the causes of which are essentially foreign to 
our concerns. Hence, therefore, it must be unwise in us to implicate ourselves, by artificial ties in . . . the 
ordinary combinations and collisions of her friendships, or enmities. . ..
Why forego the advantages of so peculiar a situation? Why quit our own to stand upon foreign ground? 
Why, by interweaving our destiny with that of any part of Europe, entangle our peace and prosperity in 
the toils of European ambition, rivalship, interest, humor, or caprice?
`Tis our true policy to steer clear of permanent alliances, with any portion of the foreign world; so far, I 
mean, as we are now at liberty to do it;. . .
Harmony, liberal intercourse with all nations, are recommended by policy, humanity, and interest. But 
even our commercial policy should hold an equal and impartial hand: neither seeking nor granting 
exclusive favors or preferences; . . .
Contrary to the policy of isolation and neutrality in Europe, Americans believed from the beginning that 
the United States had a special, paternalistic relationship with other nations in the Western Hemisphere 
because of our shared colonial heritage.
In 1823 President James Monroe engineered the Monroe Doctrine, declaring that America and Europe 
would occupy separate spheres of influence, and comply with policies of non- colonization and nonintervention. Europe was to engage in no further colonization in the Western Hemisphere and in return 
the United States would stay out of European affairs. At the time the United States had no means of 
backing up this declaration militarily, but Europe was too preoccupied with colonization efforts in Asia 
and Africa to extend colonial involvement in the Americas and so the “doctrine” stood.
240

James Monroe, “Monroe Doctrine,” 1823
The occasion has been judged proper, for asserting as a principle . . . that the American Continents . . . 
are henceforth not to be considered as subjects for future colonization by any European Power.
Of events in [Europe], with which we have so much intercourse, and from which we derive our origin, we 
have always been anxious and interested spectators. The Citizens of the United States cherish 
sentiments the most friendly, in favor of the liberty and happiness of their fellowmen on that side of the 
Atlantic. In the wars of the European powers, in matters relating to themselves, we have never taken any 
part, nor does it comport with our policy, so to do. It is only when our rights are invaded, or seriously 
menaced, that we resent injuries, or make preparation for our defense. With the movements in this 
Hemisphere we are of necessity more immediately connected…The political system of the allied powers 
is essentially different in this respect from that of America. . . We owe it therefore to candor, and to the 
amicable relations existing between the United States and those powers, to declare that we should 
consider any attempt on their part to extend their system to any portion of this Hemisphere, as 
dangerous to our peace and safety. With the existing colonies or dependences of any European power, 
we have not interfered, and shall not interfere. But with the Governments who have declared their 
Independence, and maintained it, and whose Independence we have, on great consideration, and on 
just principles, acknowledged, we could not view any interposition for the purpose of oppressing them, 
or controlling in any other manner, their destiny, by any European power, in any other light, than as the 
manifestation of an unfriendly disposition towards the United States
Our policy in regard to Europe . . . is not to interfere in the internal concerns of any of its powers; to 
cultivate friendly relations with it, and to preserve those relations, by a frank, firm and manly policy, 
meeting in all instances, the just claims of every power; submitting to injuries from none. But, in regard 
to [the American continents], circumstances are eminently and conspicuously different. It is impossible 
that the allied powers, should extend their political system, to any portion of either continent, without 
endangering our peace and happiness, nor can any one believe, that our southern Brethren, if left to 
themselves, would adopt it of their own accord. It is equally impossible therefore, that we should behold 
such interposition in any form with indifference. If we look to the comparative strength and resources of 
Spain and those new Governments, and their distance from each other, it must be obvious that she can 
never subdue them. It is still the true policy of the United States, to leave the parties to themselves, in the 
hope, that other powers will pursue the same course. . .
The Monroe Doctrine became the cornerstone of American foreign policy in the Western Hemisphere for 
over one hundred years. America’s “special relationship” to the countries of the Western Hemisphere was 
strengthened by the Roosevelt Corollary to the Monroe Doctrine in 1904. The Corollary announced to the 
world that the United States would act as the protector and policeman in conflicts between American 
241

nations, thus establishing a policy that justified American intervention in Mexico, Central America, and 
even South America.
Theodore Roosevelt - “Roosevelt Corollary to the Monroe Doctrine” -
1906
…It is not true that the United States feels any land hunger or entertains any projects as regards the 
other nations of the Western Hemisphere save such as are for the welfare. All that this country desires is 
to see the neighboring countries stable, orderly and prosperous. Any country whose people conduct 
themselves well can count upon our hearty friendship. If a nation shows that it knows how to act with 
reasonable efficiency and decency in social and political matters, if it keeps order and pays its 
obligations, it need fear no interference from the United States. Chronic wrongdoing…may force the 
United States, however reluctantly, in flagrant cases of such wrongdoing and impotence, to the exercise 
of an international police power…Our interests and those of our southern neighbors are really identical. 
They have great natural riches, and if within their borders the reign of law and justice obtains, 
prosperity is sure to come to them….We would interfere with them only in the last resort, and then only 
if it became evident that their inability or unwillingness to do justice at home and abroad had violated 
the rights of the United States or had invited foreign aggression to the detriment of the entire body of 
American nations.
As noble as America’s stated goals in the Western Hemisphere were, the paternalism and control often 
exerted by the United States, and by American corporations doing business in those regions, made for a 
complicated foreign policy. American efforts at interference, influence, and occasionally armed invasion 
were often despised and rejected. While some welcomed American help, most saw that help as an effort 
to intrude in local matters in an effort to protect American interests or as an example of America’s 
paternalistic desire to discipline its unruly siblings.
Although most Americans saw “imperialism” negatively, having recently overthrown their own imperial 
rulers, the United States did act to form and maintain an empire through conquest and domination in 
some fashion. The early United States was focused on a type of continental imperialism, in westward 
expansion through the Louisiana Purchase, in the relocation and dislocation of Native American tribes 
from their homelands to reservations, and in the annexed Mexican territory gained in the MexicanAmerican War (1846-1848). Throughout the nineteenth century, “Manifest Destiny,” the idea that the 
United States was destined to control all territory from the Atlantic to the Pacific coasts, was widely held 
and promulgated.
As America developed into an industrial and continent-wide powerhouse, the sense of mission began to 
include an economic element, and a desire to expand and share the free-market system and create 
242

markets and suppliers of raw materials for industrialization. Along with this sense of mission, other 
motivating factors behind American foreign policy decisions came into play. A spirit of “nationalism,” a 
strong patriotic devotion to one’s country, has also played a role. This can largely be a positive attribute, 
but taken to its extreme, nationalism can lead to extreme militaristic patriotism, wars of conquest and 
empire building, domestic division, and international oppression.
This spirit can be seen during the last decade of the nineteenth century, as a spirit of nationalism and 
expansion gripped America, leading it into armed conflict with Spain. As a result of the Spanish-American 
War of 1898, the United States gained a colonial empire which included Puerto Rico, Guam, and the 
Philippines, along with the annexation of Hawaii. This “accidental empire” as some called it was not 
planned as imperialistic expansion, but was viewed that way by many of the territories that were 
acquired. For example, the Filipinos fought alongside the United States against Spain, hoping to gain 
independence. When the United States decided to remain in power in the Philippines at the conclusion of 
the war, the Filipino independence movement took up arms against the United States. It took three years 
of fighting for the United States to put down the rebellion. To American policymakers, the Philippines was 
not yet ready for self-government and it was the duty of the United States to oversee the country. To the 
Filipinos, this was seen as imperialism.
One of the strongest advocates of this type of American colonial empire was Senator Albert Beveridge, 
whose ideas about manifest destiny, American nationalism and superiority, and the continuing sense of 
religious mission can be clearly seen in the following popular campaign speech.
“The March of the Flag” - Albert Beveridge – 1898
It is a noble land that God has given us; a land that can feed and clothe the world; a land whose 
coastlines would inclose half the countries of Europe; a land set like a sentinel between the two imperial 
oceans of the globe, a greater England with a nobler destiny. It is a mighty people that He has planted 
on this soil; a people sprung from the most masterful blood of history…people imperial by virtue of their 
power, by right of their institutions, by authority of their Heaven-directed purposes-the propagandists 
and not the misers of liberty.
It is a glorious history our God has bestowed upon His chosen people; a history heroic with faith in our 
mission and our future; a history of statesmen who flung the boundaries of the Republic out into 
unexplored lands and savage wilderness; a history of soldiers who carried the flag across blazing 
deserts and through the ranks of hostile mountains, even to the gates of sunset; a history of a 
multiplying people who overran a continent in half a century; a history of prophets who saw the 
243

consequences of evils inherited from the past and of martyrs who died to save us from them; a history 
divinely logical, in the process of whose tremendous reasoning we find ourselves today.
Therefore, in this campaign, the question is larger than a party question. It is an American question. It is 
a world question. Shall the American people continue their march toward the commercial supremacy of 
the world? Shall free institutions broaden their blessed reign as the children of liberty wax in strength, 
until the empire of our principles is 
established over the hearts of all
mankind? Have we no mission to 
perform no duty to discharge to our 
fellow man? Has God endowed us with 
gifts beyond our deserts and marked 
us as the people of His peculiar favor, 
merely to rot in our own selfishness, as 
men and nations must…Shall we be as
the man who had one talent and hid it, 
or as he who had ten talents and used 
them until they grew to riches? And 
shall we reap the reward that waits on 
our discharge of our high duty; shall 
we occupy new markets for what our farmers raise, our factories make, our merchants sell-aye, and 
please God, new markets for what our ships shall carry?
Hawaii is ours; Puerto Rico is to be ours; at the prayer of her people Cuba finally will be ours; in the 
islands of the East, even to the gates of Asia, coaling stations are to be ours at the very least; the flag of a 
liberal government is to float over the Philippines, and may it be the banner that Taylor unfurled in 
Texas and Fremont carried to the coast.
The Opposition tells us that we ought not to govern a people without their consent. I answer, The rule of 
liberty that all just government derives its authority from the consent of the governed, applies only to 
those who are capable of self-government We govern the Indians without their consent, we govern our 
territories without their consent, we govern our children without their consent. How do they know what 
our government would be without their consent? Would not the people of the Philippines prefer the just, 
humane, civilizing government of this Republic to the savage, bloody rule of pillage and extortion from 
which we have rescued them? And, regardless of this formula of words made only for enlightened, selfgoverning people, do we owe no duty to the world? Shall we turn these peoples back to the reeking 
hands from which we have taken them? Shall we abandon them, with Germany, England, Japan, 
hungering for them? Shall we save them from those nations, to give them a self-rule of tragedy?…
244

Wonderfully has God guided us yonder at Bunker Hill and Yorktown. His providence was above us at 
New Orleans and on ensanguined seas His hand sustained us. Abraham Lincoln was His minister and 
His was the altar of` freedom the Nation's soldiers set up on a hundred battle- fields. His power directed 
Dewey in the East and delivered the Spanish fleet into our hands…The American people cannot use a 
dishonest medium of exchange; it is ours to set the world its example of` right and honor. We cannot fly 
from our world duties; it is ours to execute the purpose of a fate that has driven us to be greater than 
our small intentions. We cannot retreat from any soil where Providence has unfurled our banner; it is 
ours to save that soil for liberty and civilization.
American Foreign Policy in the 20th Century
In 1914, Europe and much of the world 
entered into World War I (or the Great War, 
as it was then known). Unlike earlier 
conflicts, the alliance system brought nearly 
all European powers into conflict. This was 
the first industrial war, as the mighty 
colonial empires of Europe fought with the 
new technologies of chemical warfare, 
airplanes, submarines, machine guns and 
other advanced weaponry. President 
Woodrow Wilson, consistent with America’s 
long standing commitment to isolation and 
neutrality, urged Americans to remain 
“impartial in thought, as well as action.” In time, neutrality became increasingly difficult, in a nation of 
immigrants with commercial and historic ties to the Allies as well as complicated allegiances to England 
and Germany. Fig. 2
Fig. 2 Woodrow Wilson American shipping bound for Germany was blockaded by the British Navy and 
shipping bound for England or France was sunk by German U-boats. American civilians became casualties 
of war when the ships on which they sailed were sunk. And both sides in the conflict engaged in political 
intrigue and espionage here in America in an effort to disrupt our ability to support the opposite side. 
Wilson was re-elected on the platform “He kept us out of war” in 1916, and he attempted to help 
negotiate a peace. However, Wilson eventually came to decide that if the United States was to be able to 
protect its international interests, or to have any influence on what the world looked like after the war, 
the United States would have to participate militarily in a war in Europe.
245

War Message to Congress, President Woodrow Wilson, 1917
With a profound sense of the solemn and even tragical character of the step I am taking and of the 
grave responsibilities which it involves, but in unhesitating obedience to what I deem my constitutional 
duty, I advise that the Congress declare the recent course of the Imperial German Government to be in 
fact nothing less than war against the Government and people of the United States; that it formally 
accept the status of belligerent which has thus been thrust upon it, and that it take immediate steps not 
only to put the country in a more thorough state of defense but also to exert all its power and employ all 
its resources to bring the Government of the German Empire to terms and end the war.
…The world must be made safe for democracy. Its peace must be planted upon the tested foundations 
of political liberty. We have no selfish ends to serve. We desire no conquest, no dominion. We seek no 
indemnities for ourselves, no material compensation for the sacrifices we shall freely make. We are but 
one of the champions of the rights of mankind. We shall be satisfied when those rights have been made 
246

as secure as the faith and the freedom of nations can make them.… It is a fearful thing to lead this great 
peaceful people into war, into the most terrible and disastrous of all wars, civilization itself seeming to 
be in the balance. But the right is more precious than peace, and we shall fight for the things which we 
have always carried nearest our hearts -- for democracy, for the right of those who submit to authority 
to have a voice in their own governments, for the rights and liberties of small nations, for a universal 
dominion of right by such a concert of free peoples as shall bring peace and safety to all nations and 
make the world itself at last free. To such a task we can dedicate our lives and our fortunes, everything 
that we are and everything that we have, with the pride of those who know that the day has come when 
America is privileged to spend her blood and her might for the principles that gave her birth and 
happiness and the peace which she has treasured. God helping her, she can do no other.
As this address indicates, Wilson’s goals were based on America’s traditional sense of mission to offer 
the world the benefits of American liberty and free government. The entry of American forces helped 
turn the tide of the war, at the cost of nearly 32 billion dollars and 130,000 American lives. The losses by 
European combatants dwarfed those numbers, and left much of Europe’s civilian populations 
devastated by the war’s destruction.
Wilson always looked beyond the fighting of the war to a plan for peace in a postwar world. He 
proposed what came to be knows as Wilson’s 14 points, which included open covenants, freedom of the 
seas, free trade, arms reduction, and the formation of the League of Nations. With the end of hostilities 
in November of 1918, Wilson met with American allies in Versailles, France, to negotiate a peace treaty 
based on these principles.
Woodrow Wilson, 14 Points, 1918.
…What we demand in this war, therefore, is nothing peculiar to ourselves. It is that the world be made fit 
and safe to live in; and particularly that it be made safe for every peace-loving nation which, like our 
own, wishes to live its own life, determine its own institutions, be assured of justice and fair dealing by 
the other peoples of the world as against force and selfish aggression. All the peoples of the world are in 
effect partners in this interest, and for our own part we see very clearly that unless justice be done to 
others it will not be done to us. …
I. Open covenants of peace, openly arrived at, after which there shall be no private international 
understandings of any kind but diplomacy shall proceed always frankly and in the public view.
II. Absolute freedom of navigation upon the seas, outside territorial waters, alike in peace and in war, 
except as the seas may be closed in whole or in part by international action for the enforcement of 
international covenants.
247

III. The removal, so far as possible, of all economic barriers and the establishment of an equality of trade 
conditions among all the nations consenting to the peace and associating themselves for its 
maintenance.
IV. Adequate guarantees given and taken that national armaments will be reduced to the lowest point 
consistent with domestic safety.
V. A free, open-minded, and absolutely impartial adjustment of all colonial claims, based upon a strict 
observance of the principle that in determining all such questions of sovereignty the interests of the 
populations concerned must have equal weight with the equitable claims of the government whose title 
is to be determined.
VI. The evacuation of all Russian territory and such a settlement of all questions affecting Russia …
VII. Belgium, the whole world will agree, must be evacuated and restored, without any attempt to limit the 
sovereignty which she enjoys in common with all other free nations…
VIII. All French territory should be freed and the invaded portions restored, and the wrong done to France by 
Prussia in 1871 in the matter of Alsace-Lorraine, which has unsettled the peace of the world for nearly 
fifty years, should be righted, in order that peace may once more be made secure in the interest of all.
IX. A readjustment of the frontiers of Italy should be effected along clearly recognizable lines of nationality.
X. The peoples of Austria-Hungary, whose place among the nations we wish to see safeguarded and 
assured, should be accorded the freest opportunity to autonomous development.
XI. Rumania, Serbia, and Montenegro should be evacuated; occupied territories restored…
XII. The turkish portion of the present Ottoman Empire should be assured a secure sovereignty, but the 
other nationalities which are now under Turkish rule should be assured an undoubted security of life 
and an absolutely unmolested opportunity of autonomous development, and the Dardanelles should be 
permanently opened as a free passage to the ships and commerce of all nations under international 
guarantees.
XIII. An independent Polish state should be erected which should include the territories inhabited by 
indisputably Polish populations, which should be assured a free and secure access to the sea, and 
whose political and economic independence and territorial integrity should be guaranteed by 
international covenant.
XIV. A general association of nations must be formed under specific covenants for the purpose of affording 
mutual guarantees of political independence and territorial integrity to great and small states alike.
248

For such arrangements and covenants we are willing to fight and to continue to fight until they are 
achieved; but only because we wish the right to prevail and desire a just and stable peace such as can 
be secured only by removing the chief provocations to war, which this programme does remove. We 
have no jealousy of German greatness, and there is nothing in this programme that impairs it. We 
grudge her no achievement or distinction of learning or of pacific enterprise such as have made her 
record very bright and very enviable. We do not wish to injure her or to block in any way her legitimate 
influence or power. We do not wish to fight her either with arms or with hostile arrangements of trade if 
she is willing to associate herself with us and the other peace-loving nations of the world in covenants of 
justice and law and fair dealing. We wish her only to accept a place of equality among the peoples of the 
world, -- the new world in which we now live,—-instead of a place of mastery.
Unfortunately for Wilson, the allies were more focused on punishing Germany for starting the war than in 
making the world safe for democracy. Wilson was forced to negotiate away most of what he wanted in 
order to secure the acceptance of the League of Nations as a peace-keeping body. The Treaty of 
Versailles required Germany to admit guilt for starting the war, surrender her overseas colonies, pay war 
reparations, and limited its rearmament. In many ways this peace set the stage for the conflicts that 
would bring about World War II. Wilson returned home disappointed in what he had failed to achieve yet 
confident that the League of Nations could later recover part of his original plan lost at Versailles. He 
presented the Treaty to the Senate in the United States for ratification.
The Senate, however, was less interested in “making the world safe for 
democracy” than in returning to the policy of keeping America free from 
“entangling alliances.” The Senate saw the League of Nations as a potential 
blank check to involve America in other foreign wars and as a violation of the 
American Constitution, and therefore refused to ratify the treaty, preventing 
the United States from joining the League of Nations. Following World War I, 
America reduced the size of its military and retreated to its earlier position of 
isolation and neutrality.
Most Americans were frustrated by the experience of World War I, and became 
suspicious of foreign crusades, with leaders vowing never to be dragged into 
another foreign conflict, especially in Europe. Yet even in this environment, 
American interests in foreign affairs, and efforts to provide moral leadership 
between World War I and World War II, can be seen in the Washington Naval Conference (1922) and the 
Kellogg-Briand Pact. The Washington Naval Conference sought to reduce the likelihood of another world 
war by reducing and balancing the size of the world’s naval fleets. Because of the agreement, potential 
combatants including such nations as the United States, Great Britain, and Japan were supposed to find 
themselves either without the naval armaments to wage a war or so evenly balanced with their enemies 
249

that going to war seemed inadvisable. Unfortunately, for the cause of world peace, some nations, like 
Japan, came out of the conference feeling persecuted because they had not been allowed a navy in size 
equal to the United States and Great Britain, and many others along with Japan began looking for ways to 
violate the agreement and increase their naval arsenal anyway. The Kellogg—Briand Pact was an 
agreement between nations that they would not use military force as a way of furthering foreign policy 
goals. Unfortunately, this agreement, too, would be broken by those nations that saw another world war 
as beneficial to their interests.
World War II began in Asia in 1931 and in Europe in 1939. The United States tried to avoid getting pulled 
into another armed conflict on the continent of Europe just 20 years after the first world war. Congress 
passed legislation to promote neutrality in the growing conflict, trying to avoid what many saw as the 
false propaganda, business interests, and commercial arms sales that had drawn them into the first 
world war. Franklin Roosevelt, who recognized the growing threat but was limited by public sentiment, 
took measures to support Great Britain’s efforts to fight Germany, but promised in 1940 “Your boys are 
not going to be sent into any foreign wars.” The United States did not become involved directly until 
Japan bombed Pearl Harbor in December of 1941. This was quickly followed by Germany, an ally of Japan, 
declaring war against the United States.
Franklin D. Roosevelt, “Declaration of War on Japan,” December 8, 
1941
Yesterday, December 7, 1941— a date which will live in infamy— the United States of America was 
suddenly and deliberately attacked by naval and air forces of the Empire of Japan. The United States 
was at peace with that nation and, at the solicitation of Japan, was still in conversation with its 
Government and its Emperor looking toward the maintenance of peace in the Pacific. Indeed, one hour 
after Japanese air squadrons had commenced bombing in Oahu, the Japanese Ambassador to the 
United States and his colleague delivered to the Secretary of State a formal reply to a recent American 
message. While this reply stated that it seemed useless to continue the existing diplomatic negotiations, 
it contained no threat or hint of war or armed attack.
It will be recorded that the distance of Hawaii from Japan makes it obvious that the attack was 
deliberately planned many days or even weeks ago. During the intervening time the Japanese 
Government has deliberately sought to deceive the United States by false statements and expressions of 
hope for continued peace.
The attack yesterday on the Hawaiian Islands has caused severe damage to American naval and military 
forces. Very many American lives have been lost. In addition American ships have been reported 
torpedoed on the high seas between San Francisco and Honolulu.
250

Yesterday the Japanese Government also launched an attack against Malaya. Last night Japanese forces 
attacked Hong Kong.
Last night Japanese forces attacked Guam.
Last night Japanese forces attacked the Philippine Islands. Last night the Japanese attacked Wake Island.
This morning the Japanese attacked Midway Island.
Japan has, therefore, undertaken a surprise offensive extending throughout the Pacific area.
The facts of yesterday speak for themselves. The people of the United States have already formed their 
opinions and well understand the implications to the very life and safety of our Nation. As Commander 
in Chief of the Army and Navy I have directed that all measures be taken for our defense. Always will we 
remember the character of the onslaught against us. No matter how long it may take us to overcome 
this premeditated invasion, the American people, in their righteous might, will win through to absolute 
victory. I believe I interpret the will of the Congress and of the people when I assert that we will not only 
defend ourselves to the uttermost but will make very certain that this form of treachery shall never 
endanger us again. Hostilities exist. There is no blinking at the fact that our people, our territory, and 
our interests are in grave danger. With confidence in our armed forces with the unbounded 
determination of our people we will gain the inevitable triumph so help us God. I ask that the Congress 
declare that since the unprovoked and dastardly attack by Japan on Sunday, December 7, a state of war 
has existed between the United States and the Japanese Empire.
World War II changed American conceptions of its role in the world 
in very significant ways. The United States was once again swept 
into a conflict it did not create nor in which it desired to participate. 
Americans had to lay aside their notions of isolation and assume a 
new leadership role in the world. It was not something the United 
States set out to do, nor did the American people campaign for the 
job. The United States was faced with an increasingly difficult 
challenge to maintain its sense of right and wrong while at the 
same time maintaining its commitment to freedom and the right of 
self-determination.
American objectives upon entry in World War II were to rescue the 
world from military aggression and tyranny and restore the 
territorial integrity of the invaded nations. The United States sought 
total defeat of the Axis Powers so that post-war world could be 
made much safer in the future. After the war was won America 
251

sought the rebuilding of Germany and Japan for the same reasons. It did not seek to create a colonial 
empire, thereby holding to its original objectives.
The destruction of World War II altered the entire world - economically, politically, and militarily. It was a 
total war, involving more than 70 nations, and civilian losses were much higher than military ones. Entire 
societies participated, as soldiers, war workers, or victims of occupation, bombing, and mass murder. 
Even though the United States was spared the experience of total war on its soil, the country was also 
altered by the focus and involvement in the conflict, increasing the power of the president and the size of 
federal budgets to an unprecedented degree. For the most part the ideals of isolation and neutrality were 
replaced by a new sense of “mission” to protect America’s allies and the world from future military 
aggression and prevent another world war.
The United States found a new potential aggressor in its former ally, the Soviet Union.
Based on the differences in political and economic philosophies, the Soviet Union was a political, 
economic, and cultural competitor. Both countries had very different ideas of what the postwar world 
should look like. An atmosphere of fear, suspicion, and competition rose quickly between the United 
States and the Soviet Union. The Soviet Union, invaded twice in 20 years by Germany, sought to create a 
buffer zone in Eastern Europe, and exert its control over those countries and elsewhere. Americans 
feared that communist expansion and aggression would destroy world freedom, but since communism 
could not be destroyed without starting World War III, United States policy shifted to “containment,” 
limiting communism to its current sphere of influence.
This period of time came to be known as the Cold War (cold because the United States and the Soviet 
Union did not fight each other directly). America entered into a number of military alliances including 
NATO (North Atlantic Treaty Organization), SEATO (South East Asia Treaty Organization) and ANZUS 
(Australia, New Zealand, United States Alliance) to limit Soviet influence around the world. The existence 
and stockpiling of nuclear weapons during the Cold War made possible the total annihilation of life on the 
planet, encouraging the two superpowers to engage each other in proxy wars rather than world wars. A 
regional conflict in Turkey led to the Truman Doctrine where President Truman committed America to 
helping all nations around the world to resist Soviet communism. As Truman stated, “The United States 
will defend free people and their free institutions at any place at any point in the world where outside 
communist aggression threatens that nation's internal stability.” In 1949, China fell to communism and 
America pledged to support the non-communist government of China when it fled to Taiwan. America 
decided to back France’s claim to its colonies in Indochina after World War II to keep the region from 
falling under Soviet influence.
Two of the most important of these Cold War regional conflicts in terms of resources and men involved 
were Korea and Vietnam. In the wake of World War II both of these nations were left geographically 
252

divided based on Soviet and 
American influences. In both 
areas, forces allied with the 
Soviets sought to end the 
geographic and political 
divisions using military 
power.
America sought to prevent 
what it saw as communist 
aggression and expansion in 
its defense of South Korea in 
the early 1950s and Vietnam 
in the 1960s. Wrought with 
tragedy and disaster, these 
conflicts taught the United
States difficult but necessary 
lessons. 
1) Before engaging in a war it is important to understand the true nature of the conflict, the land, 
and the people involved. Many of the tragedies of the Korean and Vietnam wars occurred because 
of misunderstanding and ignorance of the land, people, and country. North Vietnamese guerrilla 
tactics are prime examples of this ignorance. 
2) Some conflicts, even when there is a noble purpose, cannot be nobly resolved. 
3) The government must have achievable objectives and clearly communicate them to the people. 
The Vietnam War was a period of political unrest throughout the country. Promises were made to 
the American people that were never kept and reports were given out with fabricated or omitted 
numbers, spreading distrust and anger among the citizens. 
4) Without a plan and clear objectives it is difficult to persuade the American people to support a 
war, especially a long war fought on foreign shores. Even with careful planning, when the people 
are dissatisfied with government and war, they have the ability to vote in a leader who will end the 
fighting, making it difficult for democracies to sustain long wars.
Another drastic change in the postwar world, in light of the battles of the Cold War, was the way in which 
“militarism” - maintaining political or economic control and enforcing foreign policy decisions through the 
use of military power - had become a key part of American foreign policy. One of the requirements for 
253

practicing militarism has been the 
existence of a standing army. 
Throughout much of America’s early 
history standing armies were rejected 
as an example of the British system of 
control over its colonies. 
Americans instead relied upon local 
militia made up of ordinary farmers, 
tradesmen, and mechanics to provide 
defense against any who sought to 
attack America or its citizens. A Navy 
was seen early on as a necessity to 
protect American shipping abroad but 
maintaining a standing army was seen 
as a dangerous temptation to use it 
either to conquer other nations or to 
exercise control over American 
citizens. Neither uses were considered 
acceptable. American wars in the 
1800s demonstrated the value in 
having at least a core group of officers 
and staff to be prepared should 
conflicts arise, but it wasn’t until
World War I that an American “army” really existed. National armed forces were necessary to fight a 
conflict overseas, but as the war ended, the country returned to a very limited military.
That attitude changed with the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. After World War II America emerged as 
the world’s super power with military obligations around the world. If peace were to be maintained in the 
future, shouldn’t the United States play a key role? And how could the United States play the role of an 
international peacekeeper and fight the influence of the Soviet Union without a strong military 
establishment? Out of this changing responsibility came the emergence of what has been referred to as 
the “military industrial complex,” which is a standing army plus all the support services necessary to 
maintain it. It is a complex interweaving of public funding and private business enterprise. In 1961, after 8 
years as president and in the middle of the Cold War, Eisenhower, a former World War II general, spoke 
about the dangers of this “military industrial complex” and its outsized power in both the economy, 
government, and American life.
254

Military-Industrial Complex Speech, Dwight D. Eisenhower, 1961
My fellow Americans: This evening I come to you with a message of leave-taking and farewell, and to 
share a few final thoughts with you, my countrymen.
We now stand ten years past the midpoint of a century that has witnessed four major wars among great 
nations. Three of these involved our own country. Despite these holocausts America is today the 
strongest, the most influential and most productive nation in the world. Understandably proud of this 
pre-eminence, we yet realize that America’s leadership and prestige depend, not merely upon our 
unmatched material progress, riches and military strength, but on how we use our power in the interests 
of world peace and human betterment.
Throughout America’s adventure in free government, our basic purposes have been to keep the peace; to 
foster progress in human achievement, and to enhance liberty, dignity and integrity among people and 
among nations. To strive for less would be unworthy of a free and religious people. Any failure traceable 
to arrogance, or our lack of comprehension or readiness to sacrifice would inflict upon us grievous hurt 
both at home and abroad. Progress toward these noble goals is persistently threatened by the conflict 
now engulfing the world. It commands our whole attention, absorbs our very beings. We face a hostile 
ideology—global in scope, atheistic in character, ruthless in purpose, and insidious in method. Unhappily 
the danger it poses promises to be of indefinite duration. To meet it successfully, there is called for, not 
so much the emotional and transitory sacrifices of crisis, but rather those which enable us to carry 
forward steadily, surely, and without complaint the burdens of a prolonged and complex struggle—with 
liberty the stake. Only thus shall we remain, despite every provocation, on our charted course toward 
permanent peace and human betterment. Crises there will continue to be. In meeting them, whether 
foreign or domestic, great or small, there is a recurring temptation to feel that some spectacular and 
costly action could become the miraculous solution to all current difficulties. A huge increase in newer 
elements of our defense; development of unrealistic programs to cure every ill in agriculture; a dramatic 
expansion in basic and applied research— these and many other possibilities, each possibly promising in 
itself, may be suggested as the only way to the road we wish to travel.
But each proposal must be weighed in the light of a broader consideration: the need to maintain balance 
in and among national programs—balance between the private and the public economy, balance 
between cost and hoped for advantage—balance between the clearly necessary and the comfortably 
desirable; balance between our essential requirements as a nation and the duties imposed by the nation 
upon the individual; balance between actions of the moment and the national welfare of the future. Good 
judgment seeks balance and progress; lack of it eventually finds imbalance and frustration.
A vital element in keeping the peace is our military establishment. Our arms must be mighty, ready for 
instant action, so that no potential aggressor may be tempted to risk his own destruction. Our military 
255

organization today bears little relation to that known by any of my predecessors in peacetime, or indeed 
by the fighting men of World War II or Korea.
Until the latest of our world conflicts, the United States had no armaments industry.
American makers of plowshares could, with time and as required, make swords as well. But now we can 
no longer risk emergency improvisation of national defense; we have been compelled to create a 
permanent armaments industry of vast proportions. Added to this, three and a half million men and 
women are directly engaged in the defense establishment. We annually spend on military security more 
than the net income of all United States corporations. This conjunction of an immense military 
establishment and a large arms industry is new in the American experience. The total influence—
economic, political, even spiritual—is felt in every city, every State house, every office of the Federal 
government. We recognize the imperative need for this development. Yet we must not fail to 
comprehend its grave implications. Our toil, resources and livelihood are all involved; so is the very 
structure of our society. In the councils of government, we must guard against the acquisition of 
unwarranted influence, whether sought or unsought, by the military industrial complex. The potential for 
the disastrous rise of misplaced power exists and will persist. We must never let the weight of this 
combination endanger our liberties or democratic processes. We should take nothing for granted. Only 
an alert and knowledgeable citizenry can compel the proper meshing of the huge industrial and military 
machinery of defense with our peaceful methods and goals, so that security and liberty may prosper 
together.
With the collapse of the Soviet Union and its influence over much of Eastern Europe the Cold War came 
to an end. In the post-Cold War era, the United States faces new challenges. A sense of responsibility, 
whether real or imagined, wanted or not, follows the United States in all aspects of foreign affairs and 
world conflicts. Often there is the expectation that the United States must “broker” peace whenever 
conflict arises in the world. And when action is taken, America is often accused by others of practicing 
economic and/or political imperialism. The American economy is so large in comparison to that of other 
nations, and America’s political power is so dominant, that any foreign policy decision the United States 
makes affects other nations and peoples. Since sometimes those effects are negative, the charge of 
economic and political imperialism is nearly unavoidable. It is important to understand that perspective 
when protesters wave anti-American placards urging “Yankee imperialist go home.”
In the new century’s foreign policy challenges, unstable nations and renegade terrorist organizations are 
difficult to identify and to fight with conventional warfare. Despite our military might, and even with 
justice on our side, it proves very difficult to intervene in the internal matters of another nation, especially 
when we don't fully understand the history involved, the parties at play, and are unable to foresee all 
consequences. Often what is right is not so clear, politics and money are involved, and honest and 
256

informed people can have differences of opinion. How we define our national interest, whether it be 
global climate concerns, business interests, supporting democratic movements or supporting human 
rights - all of these factors enter into the foreign policy of today. There is still a sense of mission, but it is a 
very complicated world.
Guidance from our church leaders can help us feel peace and hope, and inspire us even in difficult times. 
In the General Conference following September 11th, 2001, President Gordon B. Hinckley gave an 
address called “The Times in Which We Live.” He highlighted the opposition in all things nature of our 
world, and counseled us to be hopeful in spite of the difficulties of the last days.
Let us be prayerful. Let us pray for righteousness. Let us pray for the forces of good. Let us reach out to 
help men and women of goodwill, whatever their religious persuasion and wherever they live. Let us 
stand firm against evil, both at home and abroad. Let us live worthy of the blessings of heaven, reforming 
our lives where necessary and looking to Him, the Father of us all. He has said, “Be still, and know that I 
am God.” Are these perilous times? They are. But there is no need to fear. We can have peace in our 
hearts and peace in our homes. We can be an influence for good in this world, every one of us.
In General Conference April 2003, President Hinckley continued his counsel in an address entitled “War 
and Peace.”
We sometimes are prone to glorify the great empires of the past, such as the Ottoman Empire, the 
Roman and Byzantine Empires, and in more recent times, the vast British Empire. But there is a darker 
side to every one of them. There is a grim and tragic overlay of brutal conquest, of subjugation, of 
repression, and an astronomical cost in life and treasure….In the course of history tyrants have arisen 
from time to time who have oppressed their own people and threatened the world. Such is adjudged to 
be the case presently, and consequently great and terrifying forces with sophisticated and fearsome 
armaments have been engaged in battle.
One of our Articles of Faith, which represent an expression of our doctrine, states, “We believe in being 
subject to kings, presidents, rulers, and magistrates, in obeying, honoring, and sustaining the law…” But 
modern revelation states that we are to “renounce war and proclaim peace.”In a democracy we can 
renounce war and proclaim peace. There is opportunity for dissent. Many have been speaking out and 
doing so emphatically. That is their privilege. That is their right, so long as they do so legally…When war 
raged between the Nephites and the Lamanites, the record states that “the Nephites were inspired by a 
better cause, for they were not fighting for … power but they were fighting for their homes and their 
liberties, their wives and their children, and their all, yea, for their rites of worship and their church.“And 
they were doing that which they felt was the duty which they owed to their God”…
257

It is clear from these and other writings that there are times and circumstances when nations are 
justified, in fact have an obligation, to fight for family, for liberty, and against tyranny, threat, and 
oppression…This places us in the position of those who long for peace, who teach peace, who work for 
peace, but who also are citizens of nations and are subject to the laws of our governments. 
Furthermore, we are a freedom-loving people, committed to the defense of liberty wherever it is in 
jeopardy. I believe that God will not hold men and women in uniform responsible as agents of their 
government in carrying forward that which they are legally obligated to do. It may even be that He will 
hold us responsible if we try to impede or hedge up the way of those who are involved in a contest with 
forces of evil and repression.
Now, there is much that we can and must do in these perilous times. We can give our opinions on the 
merits of the situation as we see it, but never let us become a party to words or works of evil concerning 
our brothers and sisters in various nations on one side or the other. Political differences never justify 
hatred or ill will. I hope that the Lord’s people may be at peace one with another during times of trouble, 
regardless of what loyalties they may have to different governments or parties.
Let us pray for those who are called upon to bear arms by their respective governments and plead for 
the protection of heaven upon them that they may return to their loved ones in safety….We can hope 
and pray for that glorious day foretold by the prophet Isaiah when men “shall beat their swords into 
plowshares, and their spears into pruninghooks: nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither 
shall they learn war any more.”
Even in an evil world we can so live our lives as to merit the protecting care of our Father in Heaven. We 
can be as the righteous living among the evils of Sodom and Gomorrah. Abraham pleaded that these 
cities might be spared for the sake of the righteous. And, above all, we can cultivate in our own hearts, 
and proclaim to the world, the salvation of the Lord Jesus Christ. Through His atoning sacrifice we are 
certain life will continue beyond the veil of death. We can teach that gospel which will lead to the 
exaltation of the obedient.
Even when the armaments of war ring out in deathly serenade and darkness and hatred reign in the 
hearts of some, there stands immovable, reassuring, comforting, and with great outreaching love the 
quiet figure of the Son of God, the Redeemer of the world. We can proclaim with Paul: “For I am 
persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, 
nor things to come,
“Nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which 
is in Christ Jesus our Lord.”
258

This life is but a chapter in the eternal plan of our Father. It is full of conflict and seeming incongruities. 
Some die young. Some live to old age. We cannot explain it. But we accept it with the certain knowledge 
that through the atoning sacrifice of our Lord we shall all go on living, and this with the comforting 
assurance of His immeasurable love.
He has said, “Learn of me, and listen to my words; walk in the meekness of my Spirit, and you shall 
have peace in me” (D&C 19:23).
And there, my brothers and sisters, we rest our faith. Regardless of the circumstances, we have the 
comfort and peace of Christ our Savior, our Redeemer, the living Son of the living God. I so testify in His 
holy name, even the name of Jesus Christ, amen.
Conclusion
What then, is our role in supporting the foundational principles of America that we have studied this 
semester? We must be educated and informed, understanding our historic past as well as current affairs. 
We should understand how the United States has evolved through its relatively short history, and see 
how key principles have been expanded through the amendment procedure to expand the reach of 
freedom and agency; to end slavery, expand full citizenship, and protect individual freedoms. Brigham 
Young once declared that both the signers of the Declaration of Independence and the framers of the 
Constitution “were inspired from on high to do that work.” But he then went on to ask, “Was that which 
was given to them perfect not admitting of any addition whatever?…[The founders] laid the foundation, 
and it was for after generations to rear the superstructure upon it. It is a progressive—a gradual work.”
What should today’s generation do to contribute to the work? Joseph Smith prophesied many times of 
the key role that righteous Latter-Day Saints would have in protecting and defending Constitutional 
government. As members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints we are under special 
obligation to be examples of “public virtue,” to be righteous citizens and contributors with our vote and 
voice. In General Conference in October of 1987 President Ezra Taft Benson gave some specific advice on 
how American members of the church could best support constitutional principles and protect the 
democratic republic in which they live.
I desire, therefore, to speak to you about our divine Constitution, which the Lord said “belongs to all 
mankind” (D&C 98:5) “and should be maintained for the rights and protection of all flesh, according to 
just and holy principles” (D&C 101:77). The Constitution of the United States has served as a model for 
many nations and is the oldest constitution in use today. The dedicatory prayer for the Kirtland Temple, 
as dictated by the Lord and found in the Doctrine and Covenants, contains these words: “May those 
259

principles, which were so honorably and nobly defended, namely, the Constitution of our land, by our 
fathers, be established forever” (D&C 109:54)…
How then can we best befriend the Constitution in this critical hour and secure the blessings of liberty 
and ensure the protection and guidance of our Father in Heaven?
First and foremost, we must be righteous. John Adams said, “Our Constitution was made only for a moral 
and religious people. It is wholly inadequate to the government of any other.” If the Constitution is to 
have continuance, this American nation, and especially the Latter-day Saints, must be virtuous.
Second, we must learn the principles of the Constitution in the tradition of the Founding Fathers…Are we 
reading the Constitution and pondering it? Are we aware of its principles? Are we abiding by these 
principles and teaching them to others?
Could we defend the Constitution? Can we recognize when a law is constitutionally unsound? Do we 
know what the prophets have said about the Constitution and the threats to it?
Third, we must become involved in civic affairs to see that we are properly represented. The Lord said 
that “he holds men accountable for their acts in relation” to governments “both in making laws and 
administering them” (D&C 134:1). We must follow this counsel from the Lord: “Honest men and wise men 
should be sought for diligently, and good men and wise men ye should observe to uphold; otherwise 
whatsoever is less than these cometh of evil” (D&C 98:10).
Fourth, we must make our influence felt by our vote, our letters, our teaching, and our advice. We must 
become accurately informed and then let others know how we feel. The Prophet Joseph Smith said: “It is 
our duty to concentrate all our influence to make popular that which is sound and good, and unpopular 
that which is unsound. ‘Tis right, politically, for a man who has influence to use it. From henceforth I 
will maintain all the influence I can get” (History of the Church,5:286).
May God give us the faith and the courage exhibited by those patriots who pledged their lives, their 
fortunes, and their sacred honor.
May we be equally as valiant and as free, I pray in the name of Jesus Christ, amen