Week 6: Religion in America
In colonial America, religion was a major motivating factor in choosing to travel to the New World and 
significantly influenced the development of political ideas. It would be difficult to examine and 
understand the development of American politics and culture without understanding the role religious 
belief played in the lives of the early colonists. The church was central to the community and intertwined 
with both political and economic power.
The time period of colonization coincided with the great religious debates going on in Europe between 
Catholicism and Protestantism. Protestants were groups that had protested against the doctrine and 
practice of the Catholic church and broken away to create their own sects of Christianity. The Church of 
England, which was the official and established church in England, separated from the Catholic church in 
the 1500s, with the King considered the head of the church. This was the result of political maneuvering, 
not necessarily in support of the doctrinal principles taught by Martin Luther and others as part of the 
Protestant Reformation.
The majority of colonists in British North America, with some notable exceptions, were Protestants, and 
many were seeking religious opportunity and freedom. At its core, Protestantism was a religious tradition 
of dissent from the status quo. Puritans were members of the Church of England and wished to remove, 
or purify, the church from the remnants of Catholic doctrine that remained. Puritans traveled by the 
thousands to New England. The Pilgrims, on the other hand, were a group of separatists that wanted to 
no longer be a part of the Church of England. They 
were persecuted in their homeland, and were forced 
to move first to the Netherlands and then to the 
colonies. Only a few hundred migrated to Plymouth 
in what became Massachusetts, but their social and 
religious influence was powerful beyond their 
numbers.
The Puritans saw the colonizing venture as tied to 
their religious mission—a “city set upon a hill” as an 
example of a pure religious community in covenant 
with one another.
John Winthrop, one of the Puritan leaders who would 
serve for many years as governor of the 
110

Massachusetts Bay Colony, issued this sermon setting forth his vision of the society he wished to create 
in the New World before the Puritans arrived.
John Winthrop, “A Model of Christian Charity,” Massachusetts Bay 
Colony, 1630
“That which the most in their churches maintain as truth in profession only, we must bring into familiar 
and constant practice; as in this duty of love, we must love brotherly without dissimulation, we must 
love one another with a pure heart fervently. We must bear one another’s burdens. We must not look 
only on our own things, but also on the things of our brethren. Neither must we think that the Lord will 
bear with such failings at our hands as he doth from those among whom we have lived…
Thus stands the cause between God and us. We are entered into covenant with Him for this work. We 
have taken out a commission. The Lord hath given us leave to draw our own articles. We have professed 
to enterprise these and those accounts, upon these and those ends. We have hereupon besought Him of 
favor and blessing. Now if the Lord shall please to hear us, and bring us in peace to the place we desire, 
then hath He ratified this covenant and sealed our commission, and will expect a strict performance of 
the articles contained in it; but if we shall neglect the observation of these articles which are the ends we 
have propounded, and, dissembling with our God, shall fall to embrace this present world and 
prosecute our carnal intentions, seeking great things for ourselves and our posterity, the Lord will surely 
break out in wrath against us; be revenged of such a people and make us know the price of the 
breaches of such a covenant.
Now the only way to avoid this shipwreck, and to provide for our posterity, is to follow the counsel of 
Micah, to do justly, to love mercy, to walk humbly with our God. For this end, we must be knit together, 
in this work, as one man. We must entertain each other in brotherly affection. We must be willing to 
abridge ourselves of our superfluities, for the supply of other’s necessities. We must uphold a familiar 
commerce together in all meekness, gentleness, patience
and liberality. We must delight in each other; make other’s conditions our own; rejoice together, mourn 
together, labor and suffer together, always having before our eyes our commission and community in 
the work, as members of the same body. So shall we keep the unity of the spirit
in the bond of peace. The Lord will be our God, and delight to dwell among us, as His own people, and 
will command a blessing upon us in all our ways. So that we shall see much more of His wisdom, power, 
goodness and truth, than formerly we have been acquainted with. We shall find that the God of Israel is 
among us, when ten of us shall be able to resist a thousand of our enemies; when He shall make us a 
praise and glory that men shall say of succeeding plantations, “the Lord make it likely that of New 
111

England.” For we must consider that we shall be as a city upon a hill. The eyes of all people are upon us. 
So that if we shall deal falsely with our God in this work we have undertaken, and so cause Him to 
withdraw His present help from us, we shall be made a story and a by-word through the world…”
Other colonies were founded for religious reasons as well, with a somewhat more modern understanding 
of religious freedom. Rhode Island was founded by Roger Williams, who fled Massachusetts and what he 
saw as restrictive Puritan ideology. Pennsylvania was founded by William Penn, a Quaker, as a haven for 
Quakers and other religious outsiders. Lord Baltimore, a Catholic Englishman, was given a land grant in 
recognition of service to the King in the colonies. His land was called Maryland, in honor of the Catholic 
Queen Mary. As a result of the different settlement patterns and populations throughout the thirteen 
British colonies, there was a tremendous diversity of sects, churches, and beliefs.
As settlements grew westward, through continued immigration and natural increase, new churches 
needed to be built and ministers chosen for those communities. By 1720, this led to a certain amount of 
declining spirituality and increasing religious diversity, especially within the Puritan ideology that ruled 
New England. Many began to fear that the spiritual level of people’s lives was declining, that involvement 
with churches was waning, and that the general power of religious teaching was losing influence. The 
First Great Awakening was a movement designed to combat those trends and encourage greater 
spirituality. Ministers and religious philosophers traveled throughout British North America preaching, 
teaching, and encouraging religious belief and practice. The movement also created important 
opportunities for discussion between members of different religious sects.
The First Great Awakening did rekindle religious values, commitments, and sentiments among many of 
the colonies, including a sense of unity and a strong Protestant heritage. It fostered both greater religious 
diversity and religious toleration. Much of the preaching and teaching focused on an individual’s 
relationship to God and personal responsibility for salvation and revelation. Less established groups, like 
the Baptists, found an opportunity to spread their message. By the 1770s, while it was still illegal to build 
a Baptist church in Virginia, Baptists could legally preach from street corners. Within this variety, there 
was piety (spirituality) and churchgoing throughout the colonies, as religious belief and allegiance was 
interconnected with social and economic life.
Many of the colonies continued to have an official, established church. In Massachusetts and other New 
England colonies, the Congregational (Puritan) church was the established church. In Virginia, it was the 
Church of England (Anglican). Where colonies had established churches, those churches had the ability to 
compel worship through civil law and financial support through taxation. Membership in the church was 
necessary for voting and holding public office. Revolutionary leaders like Thomas Jefferson, George 
Washington, and John Adams had to be members of the established churches in their colonies in order to 
participate in the political process.
112

As a result of the First Great Awakening, even in those colonies with established churches, dissenters 
were a more accepted part of the community and experienced significant freedom of worship and 
expression. The religious picture in the colonies was a very complicated and diverse one. As the 
Continental Congress met for the first time in 1774, they attempted to begin their business with prayer. 
Some delegates objected, as John Adams reported, “because we were so divided in religious sentiments, 
some Episcopalians, some Quakers, some Anabaptists, some Presbyterians and some Congregationalists, 
that we could not join in the same act of worship.” For many Americans, the obvious contradiction 
between government establishments of religion and true liberty were coming to the fore. Freedom of 
religious conscience became more important as a key natural right, and the practice of a civil government 
tied to an established church came into question.
The debate over religious liberty grew right alongside the push for political liberty in the Revolutionary 
Era. Thomas Jefferson and James Madison led the struggle in Virginia to grant complete religious freedom 
to all people in the state, and targeted in particular compulsory taxing in support of churches and 
compulsory attendance at services. Jefferson’s writings on the subject are among his most powerful, and 
together with the Declaration of Independence and the founding of the University of Virginia are the life 
accomplishments that Jefferson chose to feature on his gravestone.
Thomas Jefferson, Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom, 1779
Whereas Almighty God hath created the mind free;
That all attempts to influence it by temporal punishments, or burthens, or by civil incapacitations, tend 
only to beget habits of hypocrisy and meanness, and are a departure from the plan of the holy author 
of our religion, who being lord both of body and mind, yet chose not to propagate it by coercions on 
either, as was in his Almighty power to do,
That the impious presumption of legislators and rulers, civil as well as ecclesiastical, who, being 
themselves but fallible and uninspired men, have assumed dominion over the faith of others, setting up 
their own opinions and modes of thinking as the only true and infallible, and as such endeavoring to 
impose them on others, hath established and maintained false religions over the greatest part of the 
world and through all time:
That to compel a man to furnish contributions of money for the propagation of opinions which he 
disbelieves is sinful and tyrannical;
That even the forcing him to support this or that teacher of his own religious persuasion, is depriving 
him of the comfortable liberty of giving his contributions to the particular pastor whose morals he 
would make his pattern, and whose powers he feels most persuasive to righteousness; and is with 
113

drawing from the Ministry those temporary rewards, which proceeding from an approbation of their 
personal conduct, are an additional incitement to earnest and unremitting labors for the instruction of 
mankind;
That our civil rights have no dependence on our religious opinions, any more than on our opinions in 
physics or geometry; That therefore the proscribing any citizen as unworthy the public confidence by 
laying upon him an incapacity of being called to offices of trust and emolument, unless he profess or 
renounce this or that religious opinion, is depriving him injuriously of those privileges and advantages to 
which, in common with his fellow citizens, he has a natural right… That it is time enough for the rightful 
purposes of civil government for its officers to interfere when principles break out into overt acts against 
peace and good order;
And finally, that truth is great and will prevail if left to herself; that she is the proper and sufficient 
antagonist to error, and has nothing to fear from the conflict unless by human interposition disarmed of 
her natural weapons, free argument and debate; errors ceasing to be dangerous when it is permitted 
freely to contradict them.
Be it enacted by the General Assembly that no man shall be compelled to frequent or support any 
religious worship, place, or ministry whatsoever, nor shall be enforced, restrained, molested, or 
burthened in his body or goods, nor shall otherwise suffer, on account of his religious opinions or belief; 
but that all men shall be free to profess, and by argument to maintain, their opinions in matters of 
religion, and that the same shall in no wise diminish, enlarge, or affect their civil capacities.
And though we well know that this Assembly, elected by the people for the ordinary purposes of 
legislation only, have no power to restrain the acts of succeeding Assemblies, constituted with powers 
equal to our own, and that therefore to declare this act irrevocable would be of no effect in law; yet we 
are free to declare, and do declare, that the rights hereby asserted are of the natural rights of mankind, 
and that if any act shall be hereafter passed to repeal the present or to narrow its operation, such act 
will be an infringement of natural right.
Jefferson’s statute passed in 1786, making Virginia the first to legally separate church and state. Virginia’s 
example was imitated by other southern states, as they severed ties with the Church of England after the 
Revolutionary War. Other denominations reorganized themselves and assumed independent status from 
114

the English and European churches after independence was won. The 
American Episcopal Church was organized and the American 
Presbyterian Church was established in this period.
The Congregational Church in New England lost some of its privileges 
over time as well, although it was not disestablished in Connecticut until 
1818 and in Massachusetts until 1830.
Freedom of worship expanded to include Catholics and Jews, although 
anti-Catholicism and anti- Semitism remained a powerful strand of 
American thinking. There was an obvious connection between the power 
of political freedom inspiring religious freedom, and vice versa.
The First Amendment to the Bill of Rights, 
1789
Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise 
thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press; or the right of the people peaceably to 
assemble, and to petition the Government for a redress of grievances.
The Eleventh Article of Faith, 1842 
We claim the privilege of worshiping Almighty God according to the dictates of our own conscience, and 
allow all men the same privilege, let them worship how, where, or what they may.
Religion goes virtually unmentioned in the Constitution The last clause of Article VI prohibits any religious 
test as a qualification for office, and some read significance into the clause in Article I, Section 7 that does 
not count Sunday as a business day for the president’s return of a bill to Congress. Otherwise, the 
Constitution is silent on this issue, essentially a “godless” Constitution. But the states insisted on 
amendments to secure rights—including religious freedom—and the very first lines of the First 
Amendment address this freedom.
The First Amendment of the Bill of Rights in the Constitution is one of the most influential statements 
about the rights of Americans. The meaning of its opening lines, the religion clauses that discuss 
“establishment” and “prohibiting” has long been debated. These two clauses emerged out of a 
complicated set of negotiations during the congressional drafting processing in 1789. There were 
proposals discussed in a committee of eleven in the House, a committee in the Senate, and then a 
conference committee of both houses. Then, as now, not everyone agreed on its larger meaning, 
115

religious principles can influence one’s interpretation, and the intent of the framers can be challenging to 
discern. However, many of the founders, although supportive of religious freedom, understood the 
important role that religious belief should play in the new republic.
John Adams, Letter to the Massachusetts Militia, 1798
“We have no government armed with power capable of contending with human passions unbridled by morality 
and religion. Avarice, ambition, revenge or gallantry would break the strongest cords of our Constitution as a 
whale goes through a net. Our Constitution is designed only for a moral and religious people. It is wholly 
inadequate for any other.”
George Washington, “Farewell Address,” 1796
“Let it simply be asked, Where is the security for property, for reputation, for life, if the sense of religious 
obligation desert the oaths, which are the instruments of investigation in Courts of Justice? And let us 
with caution indulge the supposition, that morality can be maintained without religion. Whatever may 
be conceded to the influence of refined education on minds of peculiar structure, reason and experience 
both forbid us to expect, that national morality can prevail in exclusion of religious principle.”
Some argue that the amendment was originally designed to provide two specific protections: first, to 
protect individuals from the influence of government in their exercise of freedom of conscience, and 
second, to protect individuals and churches from the control of an “established” church. Current judicial 
interpretations of the religious phrases in the First Amendment focus on the idea that the government 
needs to be protected from the undue influence of religion, a “wall of separation” between religion and 
government. The United States Supreme Court has handed down many decisions that apply the 
amendment in this way.
One influential case was Engle v. Vitale (1962), where a group of New York public school families brought 
forward a complaint regarding the voluntary prayer written by school officials and recited in school 
classrooms. The prayer was as follows, “Almighty God, we acknowledge our dependence upon Thee, and 
we beg Thy blessings upon us, our parents, our teachers and our country. Amen.” Even though the prayer 
had been designed to be non-denominational and voluntary, the Supreme Court ruled that governmentsponsored prayers could not be recited in public schools and that such prayers violated the 
establishment clause of the First Amendment. This decision was highly influential on court cases that 
followed. Since this case in the 1960s, the Supreme Court has ruled against cases involving one-minute
meditation, clergy-led prayer at graduation ceremonies, and student-led prayers offered at high school 
events, among others.
116

As members of a minority religious group, we should be sensitive to others who desire to feel 
comfortable and welcomed in a public space and wary of established prayers or rituals in a public setting. 
The following article written by Dallin H. Oaks, a practicing lawyer before he was a member of the 
Quorum of the Twelve, offers interesting insights into the application of the First Amendment and 
guidance on how members might understand and discuss the religion clauses of the First Amendment. 
Oaks outlines the difference between religious freedom and a freedom from religion that has 
characterized recent public discourse and court decisions on the subject.
Dallin H. Oaks, “Religion in the Public Life,” Ensign, July 1990
“As a law clerk in the United States Supreme Court, I saw its nine justices grapple with the task of 
interpreting the First Amendment. Later, as a lawyer and law professor for more than twenty years, I did 
some of that grappling myself. As legal counsel, I helped draft the Bill of Rights for the Illinois 
Constitutional Convention of 1970. As a Justice of the Utah Supreme Court for three and a half years, I 
had the sworn duty to uphold and interpret the constitutions of our state and nation. What I have to say 
about the subject of religious liberty draws upon those experiences. …
In my view, our current condition is rooted in the 1962 United States Supreme Court decision that the 
New York State Board of Regents could not require public school children to recite a prayer authored by 
the Regents. The essence of that decision was expressed in this sentence from the Court’s opinion:
It is neither sacrilegious nor anti-religious to say that each separate government in this country should 
stay out of the business of writing or sanctioning official prayers and leave the purely religious function 
to the people themselves, and to those the people choose to look to for religious guidance.”
Elsewhere in its opinion the Court explained: “Government in this country, be it state or federal, is 
without power to prescribe by law any particular form of prayer which is to be used as an official prayer 
in carrying on any program of governmentally sponsored religious activity.
When the school prayer cases were decided, I interpreted them to forbid state-authored and staterequired prayers. As such, the cases, I thought, were correctly decided. What I did not foresee, but what 
was sensed by persons whose vision was far greater than my own, was that these decisions—defensible 
and probably even essential as rulings on the facts before the Court—would set in motion a chain of 
legal and public and educational actions that would bring us to our current circumstance, in which we 
must reaffirm and even contend for religious liberty.
In short, many understand the law today as being hostile rather than neutral toward religion—as 
forbidding all public prayers rather than simply prohibiting state-authored and state-required prayers 
in public schools. Instead of just preventing instances of state-sponsored religion in the public schools, 
117

the school prayer cases have unleashed forces that have sometimes been used to prevent the free 
exercise of religion.
At the time the first school prayer cases were decided, President David O. McKay saw the direction of 
those decisions with prophetic vision. In December 1962, he said: “By making that [New York Regents’ 
prayer] unconstitutional, the Supreme Court of the United States severs the connecting cord between the 
public schools of the United States and the source of divine intelligence, the Creator himself.”
Then, he offered this farsighted caution: “By law, the public schools of the United States must be nondenominational. They can have no part in securing acceptance of any one of the numerous systems of 
belief regarding God and the relation of mankind thereto. Now let us remember and emphasize that 
restriction applies to the atheist as well as to the believer in God.”
Six months later, just after the Supreme Court’s decision forbidding Bible-reading in the schools, 
President McKay said:
“Recent rulings of the Supreme Court would have all reference to a Creator eliminated from our public 
schools and public offices.
“It is a sad day when the Supreme Court of the United States would discourage all reference in our 
schools to the influence of the phrase ’divine providence’ as used by our founders of the Declaration of 
Independence. …”
It is clear from President McKay’s references that he was concerned about the direction and long-range 
effect of these decisions. History shows that his concern was well founded.
In the beginning, eminent legal scholars like Dean Erwin N. Griswold of the Harvard Law School ridiculed 
the idea that the Supreme Court’s school prayer decisions would lead to a great gulf between religion 
and public life. In a notable lecture published in the University of Utah Law Review, Dean Griswold said: 
“To say that [these great provisions of the First Amendment] require that all trace of religion be kept out 
of any sort of public activity is sheer invention.”
However, as time went by, the combatants on both sides of this debate took more and more extreme 
positions. They joined issue on controversies that compelled the courts to rule on ever-more-technical 
details on the offering of prayers or the use of religious symbols in public places.
What the legal scholars did not foresee is the extent to which the school-prayer and Bible-reading 
decisions would shift the burden of proof with respect to religious practices in public life. In the past, 
religion had been an accepted part of public life in the American tradition; it now became something 
that had to prove its right to remain in the public square. The principles first announced in the early 
118

1960s had by the 1970s hardened into mechanical constitutional formulas that could be interpreted in 
ways that were hostile to religion. Too many of the lawyers trained during this period have come to 
accept these wooden formulas as axioms, with the result that constitutional notions of religious liberty 
have been impoverished.
For example, the observance of a moment of silence as an alternative to school prayer was first 
suggested in a United States Supreme Court opinion. Twenty years later, after legislatures in nearly half 
of the states had passed laws authorizing a moment of silence in the public schools, the Supreme Court 
held one such law unconstitutional.
Gradually, what had been a supportive relationship between church and state (and at times excessively 
so) has become what many perceive as a hostile one. Now many see religion as suspect, while many 
others see government as repressive toward religion…
As a result of misunderstanding the importance of religious liberty in our Constitutional order, many 
citizens and even some educators have come to consider it bad taste or even illegal for public school 
teachers even to mention religious influences or commitments. No wonder we suffer an appalling 
ignorance of our political and cultural origins.
In a study done for the Department of Education, New York University psychologist Paul Vitz 
documented the extent to which textbook authors have avoided references to God or to religion. Vitz 
concluded that many students could never learn from reading their history textbooks “that religion has 
played a significant role in American history.” For example:
● One American history textbook defines pilgrims as “people who make long trips.” Another text 
lists three hundred important events in American history, and only three of the three hundred have 
anything to do with religion. No religious event is listed after 1775—an apparent judgment that each of 
the other items, including the appearance of an electric streetcar on the streets of Richmond, Virginia, in 
1886, was more important than any religious event in America since 1775.…
● Textbook discussions of pre-Civil War abolitionism and the recent civil rights movement 
commonly skim over or totally omit the religious origins of these great forces and the religious 
motivations of many who furthered them.
Removing the name of God and ignoring the influence of religious motivations distort facts and cloud 
understanding. … I prefer to believe that individuals have always had the good sense to understand that 
a person cannot be educated without understanding religious traditions and conflicts. One cannot 
understand the great music of the Western world, such as music composed for the mass or Handel’s 
Messiah, and one cannot understand the great art of the Western world, such as the religious themes of 
the masters of the Middle Ages, without understanding the religious beliefs and traditions of the people 
119

by whom and for whom those works of art were created. It is surely true that a reader cannot 
understand the language and imagery of the great literature of the Western world without 
understanding the Bible.
Recently, Elder Dallin H. Oaks and other apostles have issued statements and traveled the world 
supporting multi-denominational efforts to protect religious freedom. At a gathering in Argentina in 
2015, Elder Oaks said, “The preservation of religious freedom depends upon public understanding of 
and support for this vital freedom. It depends upon the value the public attaches to the teachings of 
right and wrong in churches, synagogues, and mosques. Believers and nonbelievers must be helped to 
understand that it is faith in God—however defined—that translates religious teachings into the moral 
behavior that benefits the nation.” As members, we understand that the United States needed to be a 
place without an established state religion in order for The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints to 
be founded, but that doesn’t mean that religious beliefs and their influence should subsequently be 
banned from public life.
First Presidency Statement on Religious Freedom, 1979
Those who oppose all references to God in our public life have set themselves the task of rooting out 
historical facts and ceremonial tributes and symbols so ingrained in our national consciousness that their 
elimination could only be interpreted as an official act of hostility toward religion. Our constitutional law 
forbids that. …
As the ruling principle of conduct in the lives of many millions of our citizens, religion should have an 
honorable place in the public life of our nation, and the name of Almighty God should have sacred use in 
its public expressions.
In December 2015, the Church issued a news release that reiterated the church’s longstanding support of 
religious freedom for everyone.
Church News Release, December, 2015
The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is neutral in regard to party politics and election 
campaigns. However, it is not neutral in relation to religious freedom. The following statements by Joseph 
Smith from 1841 and 1843 are consistent with the Church’s position today:
“If it has been demonstrated that I have been willing to die for a “Mormon,” I am bold to declare before 
Heaven that I am just as ready to die in defending the rights of a Presbyterian, a Baptist, or a good man 
of any denomination; for the same principle which would trample upon the rights of the Latter-day 
120

Saints would trample upon the rights of the Roman Catholics, or of any other denomination who may 
be unpopular and too weak to defend themselves. It is a love of liberty which inspires my soul—civil and 
religious liberty to the whole of the human race.”
—Joseph Smith, 1843
“Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Nauvoo, that the Catholics, Presbyterians, Methodists, 
Baptists, Latter-day Saints, Quakers, Episcopals, Universalists, Unitarians, Mohammedans [Muslims], 
and all other religious sects and denominations whatever, shall have free toleration, and equal 
privileges in this city ...”
—Ordinance in Relation to Religious Societies, City of Nauvoo, [Illinois] headquarters of The 
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, March 1, 1841
The Early Operation of Government Under the Constitution 
After the writing of the Constitution and the approval of 39 of the 55 delegates who attended the 
convention, the next step was ratification by the states. Although there had been compromise and 
resolution, there were still many people who were fearful of a strong central government and thus 
opposed the Constitution. In many cases, many of those most hostile to the new government were the 
most dedicated patriots of the revolutionary period.
Article VII of the Constitution set forth the ratification process. Special conventions, rather than a strict 
popular vote, were called in each state to debate the merits of the document and vote for or against its 
adoption. This insulated the process somewhat from the general fear and reluctance of the people 
towards this unknown form of government. At the same time, the framers of the Constitution recognized 
the importance of getting the support of the people if the experiment was to succeed; therefore the 
attendees to the ratifying conventions were chosen
directly by the people for that purpose. Ratification required nine states voting in the affirmative rather 
than an unanimous vote of all the states. Under the Articles of Confederation and the first experience of 
self-government, unanimity had been impossible to achieve. What was left unclear in the description of 
the process was what would happen to those states that failed to ratify. Were all 13 states automatically 
included in the union once the majority votes were cast, or did each state’s convention need to vote yes 
to be part of the new system? This was an important question, as any state left outside the union would 
weaken the whole, and indicate that the new country was still just a league of states easily subject to 
dissolution and foreign threat.
121

As the ratification process began, different groups organized to help encourage or discourage ratification. 
Those in favor, who came to be called the Federalists, felt that the new government was key to preserving 
the liberty of all people. They argued that the central federal government needed the power in taxation, 
commerce, and foreign affairs in order to govern, and that unity would provide needed stature for the 
United States on the international stage. Those opposed to ratification, the Anti-Federalists, feared that 
the president was too much like a king. They saw in the houses of Congress the opportunity to breed a 
new aristocracy of politicians and felt that a strong central government would lead to a loss of 
sovereignty and control by the states. The Anti-Federalists also feared double taxation by both states and 
the federal government under this new system.
For some states, although debate was vigorous, ratification was all but guaranteed. In others, there was a 
question about which way the conventions would decide. Delaware was the first to ratify and did so 
unanimously. After a bitter fight, Pennsylvania was next. There was little or no opposition in New Jersey, 
Georgia, and Connecticut. Massachusetts, the sixth state to ratify, was a close contest, decided only after 
Federalists agreed to push for a set of amendments to form a bill of rights as part of the Constitution. By 
June 21, 1788, with the addition of Maryland, South Carolina, and New Hampshire, nine states had voted 
to support ratification. However, the large and populous states of Virginia and New York had not yet 
decided, and without their support the Union would not be a success. Opposition in Virginia was 
formidable, but they, too, agreed to ratification after James Madison and George Washington supported 
the addition of a bill of rights. In New York, Alexander Hamilton and John Jay led the Federalist forces and, 
along with James Madison, wrote the persuasive Federalist Papers to explain the operations of the new 
government and allay concerns. On July 26, 1788, New York narrowly approved. The Congress of the 
Confederation then declared it ratified and arranged for the first elections, and the new government 
began operation on March 4, 1789. North Carolina and Rhode Island ratified the Constitution after the 
fact. The nation was on a new course, but the arguments over the nature of this new republic were far 
from over.
To make good on the promises made during the ratification battle, members of the new Congress 
proposed a list of amendments that became the Bill of Rights. Though they are not officially part of the 
original Constitution, without the promise of these amendments the Constitution may not have been 
ratified. James Madison, now serving in the House of Representatives, played a major role in the drafting 
of these amendments even though during the Constitutional Convention, he was not convinced they 
were necessary. As the government has grown in power and influence, the addition of these codified 
rights has proven providential, and the amendment process itself has allowed the Constitution to evolve 
and change.
122

In this early national period of the 1790s, the question of how to operate a government “under the 
Constitution” was a complicated one. Americans struggled to implement the Constitution in the context 
of foreign policy crises, internal threats to federal authority, and partisan bitterness. The Constitution was 
a blueprint for good government, containing key principles and sufficient details to set the stage and 
direction. However, it did not define all the power relationships or establish many of the particulars. How 
was the balance of power between the national and state governments to be allocated, recognized, and 
maintained? How should the Constitution be interpreted—strictly or loosely?
In the first national elections, George Washington was unanimously chosen by the electoral college to 
serve as the first president of the new United States. His selection recognized his service to the country 
and was evidence of the trust the people had in his virtue and integrity. Washington had rejected offers 
of a king-like position and had proven himself trustworthy to wield the new powers of the presidency. 
During his two terms in office, Washington set several precedents in the operation of the new 
government. He gave the government the benefit of his reputation and stature and set the pattern of 
how the executive branch would interact with the legislative and judicial branches. He strengthened the 
people’s faith in the new government as he personally led a militia to put down the Whiskey Rebellion, a 
protest against the first federal taxes placed on the domestic product of whiskey and a challenge to the 
new government. He worked to establish the place of the United States in the family of nations by 
negotiating treaties and settled the nation’s foreign policy on a course of neutrality and isolationism.
123

Congress followed through on promises made during the ratification struggle to propose and pass a Bill 
of Rights and acted to expand the executive branch by creating cabinet level positions. It expanded and 
defined the judicial branch through the creation of circuit, district, and appeals courts, and strengthened 
America’s commitment to the domestic free-market economy by creating a national bank and imposing 
tariffs on imports.
The judiciary struggled in the early years and appeared the weakest branch of the new government. With 
few national laws in place there were few court cases challenging those laws, and thus the Supreme 
Court seemed less visible and influential in comparison to the two other branches. Supreme Court 
justices also served as circuit court judges, traveling around the country and hearing lower court cases, 
and therefore were not as visible in the nation’s capital.
The relegated position of the judicial branch did not change until the appointment of Chief Justice John 
Marshall, an avowed Federalist, who believed in strengthening the power of the national government. He 
was appointed to the court by the second president, John Adams, and supported many of Adams’s more 
controversial policies. When the Jefferson administration came into power in 1800, they refused to certify 
an appointment of the outgoing Adams’ administration. The Supreme Court heard the case of Marbury v. 
Madison, establishing the right of judicial review, an important precedent. Marshall was the longestserving chief justice of the court, and his influence on the role of the judicial branch was far-reaching.
With continuing tensions and disagreements surrounding the implementation of the Constitution, 
political parties developed quickly, carrying over much of the controversy surrounding ratification. The 
Federalist Party was led by Alexander Hamilton and John Adams, and the Democratic-Republican Party 
was led by Thomas Jefferson and James Madison. The two parties differed about the level of power in the
national government and how power was to be distributed. The Federalists believed in a strong, 
centralized national government and a “loose” interpretation of the Constitution and the “necessary and 
proper” clause of Article I.
They saw the future of the country dependent on business and industry and believed that tariffs and 
subsidies were appropriate government support. The Democratic-Republicans believed in a weaker 
central power in favor of stronger state governments and looked to the 10th Amendment that reserved 
power to the states and to the people. Jefferson and others saw the future as belonging to independent 
farmers, and government by the common people.
President Washington, belonging to neither party, attempted to stay above the fray of fractious politics 
and warned against the power of factions in his farewell address. However, his cabinet was full of 
different points of view on many issues. His vice-president, John Adams, fought contentiously with his 
secretary of state, Thomas Jefferson. Internationally, the United States found itself in the middle of a 
European conflict, as France and England were once again at war. France felt that the United States had 
124

an obligation to repay its support during the Revolution, but Washington believed that neutrality was the 
only course for such a new nation and resisted being drawn into the conflict. Both the English and the 
French targeted American shipping. Adams was more supportive of England, while Jefferson sided more 
closely with France, but neither wanted to be drawn into the war.
When Adams became president, he created the Department of the Navy to defend America should war 
become unavoidable. He commissioned three new warships and called for the creation of a standing 
army. This buildup of war material and manpower represented a significant challenge to the republican 
principle that no standing army should exist in peacetime. It was also a constitutional challenge as Adams 
created an army without asking Congress for a declaration of war, a fact that concerned his political 
opponents Jefferson and Madison.
Another greater constitutional challenge was the passage of the Alien and Sedition Acts of 1798. These 
acts were designed to limit the debate in America about the European conflict and promote neutrality. 
But in practical terms, it was used by the Adams administration to silence political opponents and remove 
the right of free speech. French and Irish Americans, groups with long-standing reasons to oppose the 
British, faced deportation under the acts, and Democratic-Republicans who criticized Adams’ military 
buildup faced arrest and imprisonment. Jefferson and Madison saw in the Alien and Sedition Acts 
evidence of a constitutional violation and a breakdown of auxiliary precautions. The Acts seemed to be a 
clear challenge to the First Amendment right of free speech, and yet the courts failed to declare them 
unconstitutional and order their repeal. Despite the lack of congressional approval to be on war footing, 
Federalists in Congress approved and financed military preparation.
In response to these perceived violations of constitutional principles, Jefferson and Madison secretly 
wrote the Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions on behalf of those state’s legislatures in protest. They argued 
that in moments of constitutional crisis, when the regular auxiliary precautions failed to protect 
constitutional principles, the states had a right, under the principle of division of powers, to declare acts 
of the national government unconstitutional.
THE KENTUCKY RESOLUTION, 1798
Resolved, that the several states composing the United States of America, are not united on the principle 
of unlimited submission to their general government; but that by compact under the style and title of a 
Constitution for the United States and of amendments thereto, they constituted a general government 
for special purposes, delegated to that government certain definite powers, reserving each state to itself, 
the residuary mass of right to their own self government; and that whensoever the general government 
assumes undelegated powers, its acts are unauthoritative, void, and of no force…
125

Resolved, that it is true as a general principle, and is also expressly declared by one of the amendments 
to the Constitution that “the powers not delegated to the United States by the Constitution, nor 
prohibited by it to the states, are reserved to the states respectively or to the people;” and that no power 
over the freedom of religion, freedom of speech, or freedom of the press being delegated to the United 
States by the Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the states, all lawful powers respecting the same did of 
right remain, and were reserved to the states, or to the people…
This idea that states could refuse to recognize federal law became known as the doctrine of nullification. 
This idea was also unconstitutional, as it was itself a violation of constitutional principles,but it represents 
the intense frustration felt by many Democratic-Republicans over Federalist efforts to expand the powers 
of the national government. It also shows the continued disagreement over this power relationship. This 
doctrine of nullification was never fully tested during this controversy. In1800, Adams lost the presidential 
election to Jefferson in a peaceful transfer of power following the rule of law, despite the bitter political 
disagreements. The
Alien and Sedition Acts expired, and the war between France and England ended, and the army never 
materialized. However, this state’s rights view of government laid the foundation for the constitutional 
controversy that would lead to the Civil War.
The next constitutional controversy emerged when President Jefferson decided to purchase the Louisiana 
Territory from the French. The Constitution provided no provisions for incorporating foreign territory into 
the United States by purchase. But Jefferson feared a reconstituted French empire and losing access to 
the navigation rights of the Mississippi River. He decided to violate his strict interpretation of the 
Constitution and acquire the territory in what came to be known as the Louisiana Purchase. His dilemma 
demonstrates the difficulty of interpreting constitutional guidelines uniformly in a strict or loose fashion. 
Often those who are in power choose to interpret the Constitution more loosely and face condemnation 
of their actions by the opposition who are out of power. In this case, Congress and the Supreme Court did 
not challenge Jefferson’s decision, and it was ratified by the other two branches.
The Mormon Expulsion from Missouri - A Constitutional Crisis
In church history, the persecution of the early Saints looms large in the story of the Restoration. The 
inability of the Saints to garner support or protection from the federal government demonstrates the 
difficulty in applying the principles of the Constitution in the early national period.
By 1833–34, members of the Church numbered in the thousands and were settled largely in Kirtland, 
Ohio, and Independence, Missouri. Joseph Smith had identified Independence as the New Zion. As Saints 
began to gather, Missourians felt threatened by the Mormons and engaged in harassment and 
126

persecution to drive them from the state. On July 20, 1833, hundreds of Missourians gathered together 
and issued a public document demanding that Mormon immigration must stop and that Mormons must 
sell their land and businesses and leave Jackson County. A few days later, a mob forced Mormon leaders 
to sign the document, leaving little time for seeking council from state officials to protest and prevent the 
expulsion. Leaders appealed
to Missouri’s governor for help, and the state attorney general advised the Saints to seek both redress 
and protection by petitioning the circuit judge. The Church hired a legal firm to represent them and 
encouraged members to protect their homes and families by acquiring weapons. On October 20, church 
leaders announced their intention to defend themselves against attack. The Missourians interpreted that 
as a violation of the agreement the Mormons had made to evacuate. A mob attacked the Whitmer 
settlement and destroyed ten homes, leading to more violence.
The lieutenant governor tried to mediate between the two groups and persuaded the Saints to surrender 
their arms and leave within ten days, with an understanding that the other group would do the same. 
However, this was not the case, and the Saints were evacuated by force into another Missouri country. 
Joseph Smith encouraged the Saints to stay faithful, retain title to their lands, and seek redress through 
Constitutional means, and continued efforts were pursued through the courts. The next step was to 
petition the federal government directly.
Unfortunately, due to the political situation, federal help was never obtained. Appeals continued for 
years, even after the Saints’ final expulsion from Missouri in 1838.
After the Saints settled in Nauvoo in 1839, Joseph Smith and Elias Higbee traveled to Washington, D.C. to 
seek support from the national government. They obtained an interview with President Martin Van Buren 
and met with various senators and representatives. An Illinois senator promised to introduce their 
petition to Congress. At a follow-up meeting with the president, according to the Prophet’s report, Van 
Buren listened reluctantly to their message and simply replied: “Gentlemen, your cause is just, but I can 
do nothing for you… If I take up for you, I shall lose the vote of Missouri.” Joseph Smith continued 
appealing to other important political figures of the day, including many states’ rights advocates.
Joseph Smith revered the Constitution, writing while in Liberty Jail that it was “a glorious standard; it is 
founded in the wisdom of God… It is like a great tree under whose branches men from every clime can be 
shielded from the burning rays of the sun.” The Prophet believed in
the constitutional principles protecting freedom of religion and the right to property, and felt that the 
federal government should intervene within a state to protect a persecuted minority. The failure of his 
mission to get redress for the Saints from the federal government led him to write this criticism: “I am the 
greatest advocate of the Constitution of the United States there is on the earth… The only fault I find with 
127

the Constitution is, it is not broad enough to cover the whole ground. Although it provides that all men 
shall enjoy religious freedom, yet it does not provide the manner by which that freedom can be 
preserved, nor for the punishment of Government officers who refuse to protect the people in their 
religious rights, or punish those mobs, states, or communities who interfere with the rights of the people 
on account of their religion. Its sentiments are good, but it provides no means of enforcing them.” The 
persecution faced by the early saints demonstrated the lack of constitutional authority for national 
intervention into the actions of the individual states. Only after the passage of the 14th amendment was 
such action codified into law.
The Civil War
Of course, the largest and bloodiest constitutional crisis in the United States was the Civil War. It broke 
apart the federal union and caused unparalleled death and destruction. It is the key struggle that helped 
define the United States, and demonstrated the challenge of balancing national and state power. Only 
through this struggle were many constitutional controversies decided. The legacy of the war and its 
aftermath can still be felt today.
The key cause of the Civil War was the battle over slavery. The seeds of this struggle had been part of the 
earliest colonial days, as the plantation economies of the South developed and their continual need for 
labor led to the adoption of a practice unknown in England. African chattel slavery, based on a lifetime of 
service, an inherited status, and tied to race, had developed gradually during the colonial period. All of 
the original thirteen colonies practiced slavery in some regard, but the poor New England soil and the 
commercial enterprises of the middle colonies never required the numbers of slaves that could be found 
on southern plantations. In the writing of the Declaration of Independence, Jefferson had originally 
included a passage blaming King George for the practice of slavery in the colonies, but it was removed at 
the insistence of the South. It was an intense political issue. John Adams remarked to Benjamin Franklin 
during the writing of the Declaration, “Mark me, Franklin. If we give in on this issue, there will be trouble 
one hundred years hence. Posterity will never forgive us.” Many hoped that the compromises over the 
issue in the drafting of the Constitution, the 3/5representation clause and the end of foreign importation 
in 1808, would lead to the gradual end of the practice. At the time of the writing of the Constitution, there 
were 700,000 slaves held in the United States.
The continued struggle over the issue of slavery can be tied to the westward expansion. As new territory 
was acquired, there was continual controversy over the balance of power between slave and free states. 
The cotton gin, invented in 1794, lowered the cost of producing cotton, mechanizing the process of 
removing the seeds from the cotton fiber. Southern farmers shifted to lucrative plantation cotton 
production, and the need for slaves increased exponentially. Slavery expanded its reach into the new 
128

states of Mississippi, Alabama, Louisiana, Kentucky, and Tennessee, and “King Cotton” became the 
South’s major export.
In 1820, debate raged over the admission of Missouri into the union as a slave state, which would throw 
off the delicate balance in Congress. Thomas Jefferson spoke of the Missouri debate as a “fire bell in the 
night,” a warning of future destruction. Eventually, a compromise was reached, which admitted Missouri 
as a slave state and Maine as a free state, balancing
the political power once more. The Missouri Compromise also drew a line west across the unorganized 
territory acquired in the Louisiana Purchase, and decreed that any future states would be determined 
slave or free depending on whether they were above or below this Mason- Dixon line.
In the North, forces began to organize against the practice of slavery. The majority were anti-slavery, 
against the expansion of slavery because of how it limited opportunity for white immigrants to western 
territories. Anti-slavery movements focused on gradual emancipation or colonization to Africa of freed 
slaves. A small minority, abolitionists, were more radicalized and began to focus on the morality of 
slavery, calling for an immediate end to the practice and arguing for political equality. In 1831, William 
Lloyd Garrison, one of the most famous abolitionists, began publishing The Liberator, a newspaper 
specifically focused on the evils of slavery and declaring the need for its immediate destruction. He 
published the newspaper for 35 years, and southern calls for his arrest or capture on charges of treason 
were widespread.
William Lloyd Garrison, The Liberator, First Issue 1831\
Our Appeal
For the successful prosecution of our labors, we appeal to the following classes of our fellow 
countrymen, and we presume they are sufficiently numerous to fulfil our expectations:
To the religious—who profess to walk in the footsteps of their Divine Master, and to be actuated by a 
love which “worketh no ill” to others. To whom, if not to them, shall we turn for encouragement?
To the philanthropic—who show their sincerity by their works, whose good deeds are more numerous 
than their professions, who not only pity but relieve.
To the patriotic—who love their country better than themselves, and would avert its impending ruin.
To the ignorant, the cold-hearted, the base, the tyrannical—who need to be instructed, and quickened, 
and reclaimed, and humanized.
129

In defending the great cause of human rights, I wish to derive the assistance of all religions and of all 
parties.
Assenting to the “self-evident truth” maintained in the American Declaration of Independence, “that all 
men are created equal, and endowed by their Creator with certain inalienable rights—among which are 
life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness,” I shall strenuously contend for the immediate 
enfranchisement of our slave population...
I am aware, that many object to the severity of my language; but is there not cause for severity? I will be 
as harsh as truth, and as uncompromising as justice. On this subject, I do not wish to think, or speak, or 
write, with moderation. No! No! Tell a man whose house is on fire, to give a moderate alarm; tell him to 
moderately rescue his wife from the hands of the ravisher; tell the mother to gradually extricate her 
babe from the fire into which it has fallen;—but urge me not to use moderation in a cause like the 
present. I am in earnest—I will not equivocate—I will not excuse—I will not retreat a single inch—AND I 
WILL BE HEARD.
In 1848, the outcome of the Mexican War brought 
more territory into the United States, much of it 
below the Mason-Dixon line. California in 
particular wished to join the Union as
a free state, but half of its territory was below the 
line. This new territory raised the question of 
slavery’s expansion with a new generation of 
congressional leaders, and presented a much 
more difficult puzzle to solve than had been the 
case in 1820. The Compromise of 1850 allowed 
California into the Union as a free state but gave to the South the Fugitive Slave Law that required 
Northerners to aid in efforts to recapture and return runaway slaves. Political compromise had 
succeeded; however, it left many in both the North and the South at odds in the growing controversy.
In 1854, the issue of slavery arose again in connection with efforts to build a transcontinental railroad. 
Kansas, on the route of the proposal, sought to come into the union. It was north of the Mason-Dixon 
line, and therefore should have been a free state. However, its eastern border was Missouri, a slave state, 
and many settlers came into Kansas from Missouri with their slaves. Congress came up with a plan to 
have Kansas decide its status through
“popular sovereignty,” a direct popular vote that would determine whether the state would come into the 
union free or slave. Citizens of the territory organized on both sides of the issue came to vicious political 
130

and physical disagreements, in what became known as “bleeding Kansas.” Congress accepted the free 
state decision with the Kansas-Nebraska Act, but the issue was not truly settled until after the Civil War.
In 1857, the Supreme Court 
attempted to settle the slavery 
issue with the Dred Scott v. 
Sanford decision. The case 
involved a slave named Dred 
Scott taken by his master to live 
in a free northern state for 
several years before returning 
to a slave state. Scott sued for 
his freedom based on his time 
spent in a free state, and the 
case made its way to the 
Supreme Court. The Chief 
Justice on a southern-dominated court made a sweeping decision that slaves or freed slaves had no 
rights as citizens or standing in federal court, that the Missouri Compromise which restricted slavery was 
unconstitutional, and that travel in a free state did not alter a slave’s status.
Dredd Scott V. Sanford, Supreme Court Decision, 1857
A free negro of the African race, whose ancestors were brought to this country and sold as slaves, is not a 
“citizen” within the meaning of the Constitution of the United States.
When the Constitution was adopted, they were not regarded in any of the States as members of the 
community which constituted the State, and were not numbered among its “people or 
citizens.”Consequently, the special rights and immunities guaranteed to citizens do not apply to them. 
And not being “citizens” within the meaning of the Constitution, they are not entitled to sue in that 
character in a court of the United States, and the Circuit Court has not jurisdiction in such a suit.
The only two clauses in the Constitution which point to this race treat them as persons whom it was 
morally lawfully to deal in as articles of property and to hold as slaves. …
It becomes necessary, therefore, to determine who were citizens of the several States when the 
Constitution was adopted. And in order to do this, we must recur to the governments and institutions of 
the thirteen colonies when they separated from Great Britain and formed new sovereignties, and took 
131

their places in the family of independent nations. We must inquire who, at that time, were recognized as 
the people or citizens of a State whose rights and liberties had been outraged by the English Government, 
and who declared their independence and assumed the powers of Government to defend their rights by 
force of arms.
In the opinion of the court, the legislation and histories of the times, and the language used in the 
Declaration of Independence, show that neither the class of persons who had been imported as slaves 
nor their descendants, whether they had become free or not, were then acknowledged as a part of the 
people, nor intended to be included in the general words used in that memorable instrument...
The right of property in a slave is distinctly and expressly affirmed in the Constitution. The right to traffic 
in it, like an ordinary article of merchandise and property, was guaranteed to the citizens of the United 
States in every State that might desire it for twenty years. And the Government in express terms is 
pledged to protect it in all future time if the slave escapes from his owner. This is done in plain words—
too plain to be misunderstood...
It is the opinion of the court that the act of Congress which prohibited a citizen from holding and owning 
property of this kind in the territory of the United States north of the line therein mentioned is not 
warranted by the Constitution, and is therefore void, and that neither Dred Scott himself nor any of his 
family were made free by being carried into this territory, even if they had been carried there by the 
owner with the intention of becoming a permanent resident.
This decision was well-received by slaveholders in the South who saw protection for property rights and 
the proper interpretation of the Constitution. Anti-slavery forces in the North, however, were outraged at 
the decision that seemed to suggest that slavery might exist anywhere in the country and was 
constitutionally protected. As an editorial in a New York paper proclaimed, “The conspiracy is nearly 
completed. The Legislation of the Republic is in the hands of this handful of Slaveholders. The United 
States Senate assures it to them. The Executive power of the Government is theirs. Buchanan took the 
oath of fealty to them on the steps of the Capitol last Wednesday. The body which gives the supreme law 
of the land, has just acceded to their demands, and dared to declare that under the charter of the Nation, 
men of African descent are not citizens of the United States and cannot be—that the Ordinance of 1787 
was void—that human Slavery is not a local thing, but pursues its victims to free soil, clings to them 
wherever they go, and returns with them—that the American Congress has no power to prevent the 
enslavement of men in the National Territories—that the inhabitants themselves of the Territories have 
no power to exclude human bondage from their midst—and that men of color can not be suitors for 
justice in the Courts of the United States! … All who love Republican institutions and who hate Aristocracy, 
compact yourselves together for the struggle which threatens your liberty and will test your manhood!”
132

In 1859, an avowed abolitionist named John Brown decided to take matters into his own hands by 
attacking a federal arsenal in Harpers Ferry, Virginia. His plan, along with his abolitionist followers, was to 
gather munitions from the arsenal, distribute arms to the slaves in the area, and foment a large-scale, 
violent slave rebellion. Brown’s attempt failed, and he was eventually executed. John Brown made many 
powerful statements which were widely circulated and filled with passionate rhetoric:
“Here, before God, in the presence of these witnesses, from this time, I consecrate my life to the 
destruction of slavery.”
“I say I am yet too young to understand that God is any respecter of persons. I believe that to have 
interfered as I have done, as I have always freely admitted I have done, in behalf of his despised poor, I 
did not wrong but right. Now, if it is deemed necessary that I should forfeit my life for the furtherance of 
the ends of justice, and mingle my blood further with the blood of my children and with the blood of 
millions in this slave country whose rights are disregarded by wicked, cruel, and unjust enactments, I say 
let it be done.”
“I, John Brown, am now quite certain that the crimes of this guilty land will never be purged away; but 
with blood.”
The South was horrified to see Brown celebrated as a martyr to the cause in the North, which fed their 
fear of loss of control over their own affairs.
The newly formed Republican Party gained many supporters as opposition to slavery in the North 
intensified. Their slogan, “Free Labor, Free Land, Free Men” was focused on the expansion of free states 
and opportunity, although not strictly abolitionist. Their candidate in 1860, Abraham Lincoln, was 
opposed to slavery but did not believe he had the constitutional power to end the practice where it 
currently existed.
As Lincoln campaigned, he argued, “I have no purpose, directly or indirectly, to interfere with the 
institution of slavery in the States where it exists. I believe I have no lawful right to do so, and I have no 
inclination to do so.” In a four-way race for president, Lincoln was elected but with zero electoral support 
in the South. In his first inaugural address in 1861, Lincoln tried to placate the South, promising to not 
interfere with slavery in their states. Lincoln closed his speech with a call for reconciliation:
“My countrymen, one and all, think calmly and well upon this whole subject. Nothing valuable can be 
lost by taking time. If there be an object to hurry any of you in hot haste to a step which you would 
never take deliberately, that object will be frustrated by taking time; but no good object can be 
frustrated by it. Such of you as are now dissatisfied still have the old Constitution unimpaired, and, on 
the sensitive point, the laws of your own framing under it; while the new Administration will have no 
immediate power, if it would, to change either. If it were admitted that you who are dissatisfied hold the 
133

right side in the dispute, there still is no single good reason for precipitate action. Intelligence, 
patriotism, Christianity, and a firm reliance on Him who has never yet forsaken this favored land are 
still competent to adjust in the best way all our present difficulty.
In your hands, my dissatisfied fellow-countrymen, and not in mine, is the momentous issue of civil war. 
The Government will not assail you. You can have no conflict without being yourselves the aggressors. 
You have no oath registered in heaven to destroy the Government, while I shall have the most solemn 
one to ‘preserve, protect, and defend it.
I am loath to close. We are not enemies, but friends. We must not be enemies. Though passion may have 
strained it must not break our bonds of affection. The mystic chords of memory, stretching from every 
battlefield and patriot grave to every living heart and hearthstone all over this broad land, will yet swell 
the chorus of the Union, when again touched, as surely they will be, by the better angels of our nature.”
Despite Lincoln’s pleas and reassurances, many in 
the South felt they had no choice but to leave the 
Union to protect their way of life. They justified their 
secession based on their interpretation of the 10th 
amendment and the principles suggested in the 
doctrine of nullification.
The Civil War began in April of 1861 as Southern 
slave states declared their separation from the 
United States and formed the Confederate States of 
America. The war was not originally fought to end 
slavery, only to maintain the federal union, although 
every cause of the war can be traced to the fight 
over slavery. As the battle continued, wartime 
necessity forced Lincoln to
issue the Emancipation Proclamation in 1863, 
invoking his constitutional war powers. Lincoln’s proclamation freed slaves only in the states over which 
he had no jurisdiction, but this changed the focus of the war. This change can be seen in the famous 
Gettysburg Address, as Lincoln dedicated a battlefield and explained the meaning of the war as a 
continuation of revolutionary battles and a “new birth” of freedom and equality.
Abraham Lincoln, “The Gettysburg Address,” November, 1863
Fourscore and seven years ago our fathers brought forth, on this continent, a new nation, conceived in 
liberty, and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal. Now we are engaged in a great 
134

civil war, testing whether that nation, or any nation so conceived, and so dedicated, can long endure. We 
are met on a great battle-field of that war. We have come to dedicate a portion of that field, as a final 
resting-place for those who here gave their lives, that that nation might live. It is altogether fitting and 
proper that we should do this. But, in a larger sense, we cannot dedicate, we cannot consecrate—we 
cannot hallow—this ground. The brave men, living and dead, who struggled here, have consecrated it 
far above our poor power to add or detract. The world will little note, nor long remember what we say 
here, but it can never forget what they did here. It is for us the living, rather, to be dedicated here to the 
unfinished work which they who fought here have thus far so nobly advanced. It is rather for us to be 
here dedicated to the great task remaining before us—that from these honored dead we take increased 
devotion to that cause for which they here gave the last full measure of devotion—that we here highly 
resolve that these dead shall not have died in vain—that this nation, under God, shall have a new birth 
of freedom, and that government of the people, by the people, for the people, shall not perish from the 
earth.
In 1865, after four long and bloody 
years, economic devastation in the 
South from which it has yet to fully 
recover, and the loss of over 600,000 
Americans, the war came to an end. 
The doctrine of nullification was never 
promoted by the states as a check on 
federal power again. The Civil War also 
began the swing in constitutional 
interpretation of the power 
relationship between the national 
government and the states in the 
direction of the national government. It 
wasn’t until after the Civil War that 
singular verbs were used when 
describing the nation, changing the sentence “The United States are” to the grammatically incorrect “the 
United States is.”
The war redefined the image of the national government in the everyday lives of the people with a more 
powerful concept of nationalism and identified the United States with a commitment to political 
democracy. The Civil War also demonstrated the way in which public virtue acts to moderate and restrain 
the American character and remains absolutely essential to controlling the operations of government, 
135

maintaining liberty, and protecting the rule of law. In the end, the war provided a warning and taught a 
valuable lesson on the importance of public virtue and correct principles. The constitutional system is in 
danger of collapse and the life of the Union is indeed threatened if public virtue and incorrect principles 
are allowed to flourish, as was the case with slavery. Although the Civil War abolished slavery, the racial 
discrimination and prejudice that had allowed its practice evolved into another system, particularly in the 
South. An environment of violence and intimidation replaced slavery and codified racism into law, 
segregated whites and blacks with Jim Crow, and severely restricted access to social, economic, and 
political opportunities. It would take later activism and constitutional challenges to break down the 
system of racial prejudice that remained after the war.
As a result of the Civil War, the national government took a greater interest and responsibility for 
protecting individual rights. This included monitoring the actions of the states and ensuring that they did 
not infringe on the rights of the people. Initially, this meant the protection of freed slaves, although this 
was short-lived. It also included the kind of religious protections Joseph Smith sought. In essence, as a 
result of the Civil War, the national government became an institution that protected the rights of the 
people rather than an institution that oppressed and restricted the rights of the people. In other words, 
one of the changes Lincoln highlighted in the “Gettysburg Address” with “a new birth of freedom,” was the 
change in the idea of freedom from a national government turning to freedom protected by a national 
government. This represented a shift in the view of national government that many had held during the 
Revolutionary period.