Week 8: The Unequal 
Distribution of Wealth
The market system that governs the economy of the United States has led to phenomenal growth, world 
leadership, and unprecedented prosperity over the course of its history. But it is not without its 
weaknesses and challenges. In an economic environment where supply and demand determines the 
value of what one produces and consumes, and in a system that rewards effort, talents, abilities,
interests, and luck, the market naturally delivers economic rewards unequally. This creates wildly varying 
levels of income and wealth. The United States is the wealthiest country in the world, but also has one of 
the highest wealth inequality disparities in its population.
The poverty rate, influenced by the breakdown of the family, economic exploitation, the legacy of slavery 
and racism, and the influx of low-skilled immigration, has kept the poverty rate fluctuating between 10-
15% of the population living below what is considered a basic standard of living, lacking access to decent 
health care, nutritious food, and adequate housing or education. This is a significant problem, but over 
the course of American history there has always been a gap between rich and poor, and a significant 
movement of people out of poverty over time. But over the past 30 years, the unequal distribution of 
wealth has greatly increased and the gap has widened significantly. In 2013 the Congressional Budget 
Office, with the most recent figures available, reported that when looking at aggregate family wealth 
(assets minus debts), the top 10% held 76% of all family wealth, the next 40% held 23%, and the bottom 
50% held 1%. In addition, families at or below the 25th percentile were $13,000 in debt.
What are some the dangers of this enormous economic power imbalance? In a modern democratic 
republic, this concentration of wealth can be a threat to democracy and freedom, the ladders of 
opportunity, and increase the threat of corruption. There are many warnings in The Book of Mormon and 
from modern prophets that warn of the trouble caused by inequality and stark class divisions. As the size 
and complexity of the American economy has grown and American attitudes about political equality for 
all have developed and have become more inclusive, many have come to question the justice of this type 
of economic inequity. Therefore, fixing what is perceived as economic injustice has come to consume 
more and more government resources and has become an important political topic and focus. Although 
politicians will say otherwise, there are no easy answers.
It is difficult to create economic justice in our society for many different reasons. Inequality is an inherent 
part of the system, and there is complexity in defining what economic justice would look like and how 
157

institutions can go about promoting it. Some argue that greater economic justice can be helped by 
creating an environment that fosters equality of opportunity. This involves the government sponsoring a 
level of free public education for everyone, government protections against discrimination within the 
market against certain groups, and government regulations to protect against fraud, dishonesty, and 
other manipulations of the market. When opportunities are equalized in this way, more people have 
access to fully participate in the market system and all can pursue the “American Dream” with their 
talents, abilities, and efforts. Success or economic reward is not guaranteed, but more opportunity within 
the system is protected and fostered.
To further promote economic justice, some argue for a greater equality of conditions. With income 
disparity an inescapable part of the market system, some economists and politicians push for a more 
active role for government in managing the economy and ameliorating the effects of the unequal 
distribution of wealth. This involves progressive taxation (taxing the rich at a higher rate than the poor), 
and the government redistribution of tax dollars to support an economic safety net. This provides 
programs to the economically disadvantaged through direct payments to provide food, shelter, job 
training, and job insurance programs such as disability payments and unemployment benefits. This can 
reduce poverty, decrease inequality, minimize the pain of economic disruptions, and stabilize the market 
system.
These programs are often called “entitlement programs” and include Social Security, Medicare, Medicaid, 
food stamps, and veterans’ compensation, among others. The vast majority of funds earmarked as 
entitlements in the federal budget help support veterans, the disabled, the elderly, and children, and are 
successful at easing some of the suffering and ill effects of poverty. Some argue that these programs can 
be seen as an investment of sorts that can help create economic contributors and help those in difficult 
situations. Yet despite the many government efforts and billions of dollars invested to end poverty, the 
rate of poverty has remained the same since the 1960s, and with any type of program there are wasted 
funds and abuses of the system.
The provision for entitlement programs is not inherently bad policy, and one could argue that they are 
necessary in some ways as they attempt to deal with the problems created by the weaknesses of the 
market system and to “promote the general welfare” as outlined in the Constitution’s preamble. However, 
there is a danger of
society developing a “spirit of entitlement” that can harm the development of the virtues of provident 
living and self-reliance. It is a spirit that can infect anyone, whether they are partaking of government 
assistance or just living with an expectation of reward without work and sacrifice. The following two 
addresses from recent leaders of BYU-Idaho offer counsel and advice about avoiding this spirit of 
entitlement in our own lives, regardless of our economic situation.
158

Repeat Over Again...the Same Things as Before
Brigham Young University-Idaho Devotional - January 26, 2016 Elder 
David A. Bednar
I began my service on this campus in the summer of 1997, at what was then the largest private 
two-year college in the United States—Ricks College. In September of that year President James E. 
Faust, second counselor in the First Presidency, visited the school to dedicate the new John Taylor 
Building. Elder Henry B. Eyring of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles and the Commissioner of 
Church Education was President Faust’s companion for that special occasion.
Elder Eyring arrived in Rexburg one day early to review several matters with me and to ensure that 
everything was in order for President Faust. When I picked up Elder Eyring at the airport, I learned 
that he had just returned from a two-week assignment in South America. He obviously was tired 
from his travels, and I was anxious to get him to our home so he could rest.
As we drove to Rexburg, I asked Elder Eyring if he was interested in quickly walking through the 
completed Taylor Building. He answered that he was interested, and we spent approximately 15 
minutes inspecting the classrooms and other facilities.
Our last stop was the Taylor Chapel, and Elder Eyring stood near the pulpit on the stand and 
surveyed the seating area for quite a long time. After a few minutes, I asked him: “Elder Eyring, 
what are you thinking about?” He answered with this profound and penetrating observation: “I am 
thinking about how much we do for so few and how little we do for so many.” He then continued, 
“The tithing of the people I just visited in South America and from good people all over the world 
paid for this facility. And most of the people who have made this beautiful facility possible will 
never see or step foot in a building like this. That is what I am thinking about.”
That experience and the lesson I learned from Elder Eyring influenced me greatly during the time I 
served at BYU–Idaho. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter- day Saints has invested millions of 
tithing dollars over the last 15 years to upgrade the BYU–Idaho campus and programs. Such 
expenditures have been made to enhance your learning, developmental, and employment 
experiences. Please do not take these sacred resources, your choice opportunities, and this 
beautiful campus for granted.
Please do not think that you are somehow more deserving or worthy. Please be grateful for the 
singular chance you have to learn and work here and for the responsibility that rests upon you as 
one who has been the recipient of great blessings.
159

In October of 2006, I returned to BYU-Idaho as a member of the Quorum of the Twelve to speak in 
a devotional and to preside at the groundbreaking ceremony for this BYU-Idaho Center and the 
Manwaring Center addition. I repeat again the warning and promise I expressed on that occasion.
“In the authority of the holy Apostleship, I now raise a voice of warning and make a solemn 
promise. If the day ever were to come that intellectual arrogance, a lack of appreciation, and a 
spirit of demanding entitlement take root on this campus— among the students, faculty, 
employees or the administration, or within the community—then in that day the Spirit of Ricks will 
be well on the way to being extinguished—and the heavenly influence and blessings that have 
prospered this institution and the people associated with it will be withdrawn. Conversely, as long 
as intellectual modesty, humility, gratitude, obedience, and frugality continue to characterize 
those who learn and serve at BYU–Idaho, then this university will shine forth ever brighter as a 
beacon of righteousness and of inspired educational innovation” (David A. Bednar, The Spirit and 
Purposes of Gathering, Oct. 2006, 10- 11).
I repeated that identical warning and promise at the dedicatory service of this building in 
December of 2010. Today I emphasize, affirm, and renew that warning and promise for a third 
time. You understandably may be asking yourself the question, why repeat this message a third 
time?
I am not the same man who warned and promised in 2006 and 2010. I am the same man, but I am 
different. I have traveled the earth for more than a decade and visited countless homes of faithful 
Church members—the rich and the poor, the meek and the humble, the educated and the 
uneducated. Those converted and consecrated Latter-day Saints have changed me.
I participate every year in the Council on the Disposition of the Tithes with the First Presidency, the 
other members of the Twelve, and the Presiding Bishopric. I witness firsthand the watch care 
exercised by the leaders of this Church over the widow’s mite that makes it possible for you to be 
a student or an employee at this university. Those experiences have changed me.
As sincere and earnest as I was in 2006 when I first delivered that warning and promise, I am 
many times more focused and intense about it today than I was then.
This campus is not the same campus it was in 1997 or 2006 or 2010. The campus is the same but 
different. I have watched for many years as the Lord has blessed and prospered the students, 
staff, and faculty of this remarkable university. The facilities are functional and beautiful. The 
students, staff, and faculty are faithful and diligent. So much has been accomplished in such a 
short period of time.
160

And precisely because you and the university are being blessed and prospered, the warning and 
promise are needed a third time. In particular, a warning is most needed when we do not think we 
need to be warned. Using the language of the Old Testament prophet Haggai, I invite you to 
carefully and prayerfully “consider your ways” (Haggai 1:5, 7). Is your pride allowing intellectual 
arrogance to creep into your mind and heart? Are you forgetting the Lord and failing to appreciate 
His bounteous blessings and promises? Are you turning inward, becoming self-centered, and 
gradually developing an attitude of personal privilege and entitlement?
These insidious spiritual flaws can develop in us so subtly that we may not recognize or respond 
to them. As you ponder these questions sincerely and with real intent, I promise the Holy Ghost 
will help you to see yourself as you “really are” (Jacob 4:13) and to identify both the things you 
presently are doing well and the course corrections you need to make in your life.
I believe consecrated people like you in this sacred and set apart place, with the help of the Lord 
and by the power of His Holy Spirit, can attenuate the pride cycle so prominently highlighted 
throughout the Book of Mormon. You can prosper and remain submissive. You can succeed and 
avoid arrogance. You can receive blessings with gratitude and not be seduced by a sense of selfserving entitlement. You can increase the intensity of the righteous light that shines forth from 
Brigham Young University-Idaho.
I love you, and I love BYU-Idaho. I invoke the Lord’s blessings upon you, both individually and 
collectively—even the spiritual capacities and gifts that will be necessary for you to overcome and 
avoid the pride that so often follows periods of great prosperity.
Drenched in Gratitude: Protection Against the Spirit of Entitlement 
Elder Kim B. Clark - President of BYU-Idaho (September 14, 2010)
When physical poisons enter the body, they disrupt the body’s systems and organs and can cause illness 
and even death. There are also spiritual poisons that disrupt our capacity to discern spiritual feelings 
and impressions. In their most advanced and virulent forms, spiritual poisons cause the afflicted to “die 
as to things pertaining unto righteousness” (Alma 12:16). There are many kinds of spiritual poisons. 
Today, I would like to talk about a spiritual poison that hardens the heart and deadens the soul. I speak 
today of the spirit of entitlement…
If you and I have the spirit of entitlement, it means we have an attitude and belief that the world owes 
us what we want. Like Laman and Lemuel, some who harbor the spirit of entitlement believe they have 
been shortchanged in life or aggrieved in some way and that they deserve more than they are getting. 
Often those who succumb to the spirit of entitlement feel superior to those around them, or believe 
161

certain rules should not apply to them, or that they should not be required to do what everyone else has 
to do. They believe they are entitled to special treatment and special privileges. They want something for 
nothing.
The spirit of entitlement has a history that goes back to the War in Heaven. Satan was full of pride and 
the spirit of entitlement when he rebelled and fought against the Father and the Son. He said to God, “I 
will redeem all mankind, that one soul shall not be lost, and surely I will do it; wherefore give me thine 
honor.” Jesus, in contrast, said simply, “Father, thy will be done, and the glory be thine forever.”
It is the law of heaven that “when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon 
which it is predicated.” But the blessing comes in God’s “own time, and in his own way.” Not only was 
Satan’s proposal contrary to God’s law and plan, but he demanded the blessing of God’s honor. Where 
Jesus was humble and submissive to the Father’s will, Satan was proud and entitled. Satan embraced 
the demanding spirit of entitlement in the pre-mortal realm and was “cast down.” Now he seeks to infect 
us with its deadly poison.
That infection often begins with small and simple feelings we might each encounter under certain 
circumstances; for example, a brother who was absent for several classes in the semester but claimed 
he should be treated differently because he was the head of a campus organization; or a sister who felt 
she had a right to an A in a class just because she had turned in all the assignments; or a brother who 
believed he had a right to park next to every classroom building.
The spirit of entitlement is a poison that works on the spiritual heart. Our heart contains our deepest 
desires and commitments and our character and our will. It is to and in our heart that the Lord 
communicates spiritual truth and divine guidance. When the spirit of entitlement gets into our hearts, 
we become overly concerned with measures of material success and preoccupied with indicators of rank 
and privilege. Greed creeps in, and we develop an attitude that we deserve to have our worldly wants 
and the desires of the natural man satisfied.
When this happens, we are on our way to becoming like the people the Lord described in the first 
section of the Doctrine and Covenants: “They seek not the Lord to establish his righteousness, but every 
mawn alketh in his own way, and after the image of his own god.”
Brothers and sisters, this is what the spirit of entitlement is and what it does. It separates us from God 
and makes us forget the Savior and our dependence on His mercy and grace. It is a deadly spiritual 
poison. But we can be like Naaman after he washed himself in the Jordan seven times. If we will turn to 
God, humble ourselves, and repent, the Lord Jesus Christ will take away the poison and heal and change 
our hearts.
162

Like physical pain and swelling, there are warning signs of the spirit of entitlement. And so, we need to 
search our hearts to see if we find any sign of the spirit of entitlement there. Here are some questions 
that may help in the search: Are you overly critical of others? Do you look down on others? Is the word 
“deserve” used frequently in your vocabulary—as in “I deserve” or “I don’t deserve” this or that? Do you 
care too much about indicators of status and rank? If you are not recognized, or accorded a privilege, or 
blessed immediately after doing something good —do you hear a voice inside saying, “What about me?” 
or “That is not
fair”? Do you ever seek special treatment for yourself? Does it happen often?
The answers to these questions could be early warning signs that the spirit of entitlement is at work. If 
you or I ever feel these things or hear these things in our minds, we should not be like the little boy with 
the pitchfork wound in his foot. We should not foolishly wait for the poison to work. We should act in 
faith in Christ and repent—turn away from the spirit of entitlement and turn to the healing, redeeming 
power of the Lord.
Brothers and sisters, gratitude is the great antidote, the great protection against the spirit of entitlement. 
What we need is deep gratitude for the Lord Jesus Christ. We need to be drenched in gratitude for Him 
so that we “confess . . . his hand in all things” and “live in thanksgiving daily for the many mercies and 
blessings which he doth bestow upon [us](Alma 34:38).”
I would like to close by suggesting three things we can do to engender a spirit of gratitude in our lives: 
pray with real intent, partake of the sacrament with our hearts and minds focused on the Savior, and 
worship in the temple with thanksgiving. These are gifts from the Savior. He has created them for us and 
taught us how to use them. They are opportunities to help us always remember Him and express our 
love and gratitude for Him. If we pursue these three sacred opportunities with full purpose of heart, we 
will have the spirit of gratitude in our lives and we will be protected from the spirit of entitlement. We 
will feel like and be like the people at the temple at Bountiful when the Savior appeared to them.
Economic Virtue - Worth Ethic, Self Reliance, Provident Living, and 
Charity 
A strong work ethic, self-reliance, provident living, and charitable giving are also important to the proper 
operation of the market system, and offer an opposition force to the spirit of entitlement. Economic 
virtue has long been a key topic of many talks by church leaders. The following excerpts are meant to 
help you consider these principles of economic virtue in your own lives. Notice especially the common 
principles: avoiding a spirit of entitlement, hard work and industry, self-reliance and provident living, 
avoiding debt, greed, and selfishness, and of giving of our substance to those in need.
163

Elder D. Todd Christofferson, “Reflections on a Consecrated Life” -
October 2010
A consecrated life is a life of labor. Beginning early in His life, Jesus was about His Father’s business (see 
Luke 2:48-49). God Himself is glorified by His work of bringing to pass the immortality and eternal life of 
His children (see Moses 1:39). We naturally desire to participate with Him in His work, and in so doing, 
we ought to recognize that all honest work is the work of God. In the words of Thomas Carlyle: “All true 
Work is sacred; in all true Work, were it but true hand-labor, there is something of divineness. Labor, 
wide as the Earth, has its summit in Heaven.”
God has designed this mortal existence to require nearly constant exertion. I recall the Prophet Joseph 
Smith’s simple statement: “By continuous labor [we] were enabled to get a comfortable maintenance” 
(Joseph Smith — History 1:55) By work we sustain and enrich life. It enables us to survive the 
disappointments and tragedies of the mortal experience. Hard-earned achievement brings a sense of 
self-worth.
Work builds and refines character, creates beauty, and is the instrument of our service to one another 
and to God. A consecrated life is filled with work, sometimes repetitive, sometimes menial, sometimes 
unappreciated but always work that improves, orders, sustains, lifts, ministers, aspires.
Having spoken in praise of labor, I must also add a kind word for leisure. Just as honest toil gives rest its 
sweetness, wholesome recreation is the friend and steadying companion of work. Music, literature, art, 
dance, drama, athletics—all can provide entertainment to enrich one’s life and further consecrate it. At 
the same time, it hardly needs to be said that much of what passes for entertainment today is coarse, 
degrading, violent, mind-numbing, and time wasting. Ironically, it sometimes takes hard work to find 
wholesome leisure. When entertainment turns from virtue to vice, it becomes a destroyer of the 
consecrated life. “Wherefore, take heed … that ye do not judge that which is evil to be of God” (Moroni 
7:14).
Elder Joe J. Christensen, “Greed, Selfishness, and Overindulgence” -
May 1999
…When it comes to overcoming being greedy, selfish, and overly indulgent, we all need a lot more help. 
In his candid manner, President Brigham Young said: “The worst fear … I have about this people is that 
they will get rich in this country, forget God and His people, wax fat, and kick themselves out of the 
Church. … My greater fear … is that they cannot stand wealth.”
Our prosperity brings some real challenges because many are getting rich, more of us are waxing fat, 
and as a result of greed, selfishness, and overindulgence, we could lose the Spirit and literally kick 
164

ourselves out of the Church…Money in and of itself is not an evil, but as Paul taught Timothy, it is the 
love of money that is the root of all evil.
There are some of the wealthy who deal with their prosperity very well using their resources to bless 
others and build the kingdom. For many, however, wealth presents major difficulties. As we deal with 
the materialism that threatens us, here are four suggestions for each of us to consider:
First, we should not confuse wants with needs…
If we are not careful, it is easy for our wants to become needs. Remember the line “There, there, little 
luxury, don’t you cry. You’ll be a necessity by and by.” Second, we should avoid spoiling children by 
giving them too much.
In our day, many children grow up with distorted values because we as parents overindulge them. 
Whether you are well-to-do or, like most of us, of more modest means, we as parents often attempt to 
provide children with almost everything they want thus taking away from them the blessing of 
anticipating, of longing for something they do not have. One of the most important things we can teach 
our children is to deny themselves. Instant gratification generally makes for weak people. How many 
truly great individuals do you know who never had to struggle?…In the words of Fred Gosman, “Children 
who always get what they want will want as long as they live.”…All too many enter marriage who have 
never learned to cook, sew, or develop other important life skills. Ignorance of these needed skills, along 
with the lack of understanding of the management of money, sow the seeds for many failures in our 
children’s marriages. I fear that in many cases we are rearing children who are slaves to expensive fads 
and fashions. Remember the scripture, “For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.” How 
do we determine where our treasure is? To do so, we need to evaluate the amount of time, money, and 
thought we devote to something. Might it not be well to evaluate how much focus we place on shopping 
and spending?…
Third, as we have heard so often, live modestly and avoid debt as if it were a plague.
…How much house do we really need to accommodate our family comfortably?
We should not endanger ourselves either spiritually or economically by acquiring homes which are 
ostentatious, feed our vanity, and go far beyond our needs.
If we are to be self-reliant and in a position to share, obviously we must acquire some resources. If we 
live within our means and avoid debt, resources can be accumulated. There are those with average 
incomes who, over a lifetime, do amass some means, and there are those who receive large salaries 
who do not. What is the difference? It is simply spending less than they receive, saving along the way, 
and taking advantage of the power of compound interest. Financial consultants indicate that “most 
165

people have it all wrong about wealth. … Wealth is not the same as income. If you make a good income 
each year and spend it all, you are not getting wealthier. You are just living high. Wealth is what you 
accumulate, not what you spend.”
Finally, be generous in giving and sharing with others.
The more our hearts and minds are turned to assisting others less fortunate than we, the more we will 
avoid the spiritually cankering effects that result from greed, selfishness, and overindulgence. Our 
resources are a stewardship, not our possessions. I am confident that we will literally be called upon to 
make an accounting before God concerning how we have used them to bless lives and build the 
kingdom.
Elder Jeffrey R. Holland, “Are We Not all Beggars?” - October 2014
…From the beginning of His ministry, Jesus loved the impoverished and the disadvantaged in an 
extraordinary way. He was born into the home of two of them and grew up among many more of 
them. We don’t know all the details of His temporal life, but He once said, “Foxes have holes, and 
… birds … have nests; but the Son of man hath not where to lay his head.” Apparently the Creator 
of heaven and earth “and all things that in them are” was, at least in His adult life, homeless.
Down through history, poverty has been one of humankind’s greatest and most widespread 
challenges. Its obvious toll is usually physical, but the spiritual and emotional damage it can bring 
may be even more debilitating. In any case, the great Redeemer has issued no more persistent call 
than for us to join Him in lifting this burden from the people. As Jehovah, He said He would judge 
the house of Israel harshly because “the spoil of the [needy] is in your houses.” “What mean ye,” 
He
cried, “that ye beat my people to pieces, and grind the faces of the poor?”…In our day, the restored 
Church of Jesus Christ had not yet seen its first anniversary when the Lord commanded the 
members to “look to the poor and … needy, and administer to their relief that they shall not 
suffer.” Note the imperative tone of that passage— “they shall not suffer.” That is language God 
uses when He means business.
Given the monumental challenge of addressing inequity in the world, what can one man or 
woman do? The Master Himself offered an answer. When, prior to His betrayal and Crucifixion, 
Mary anointed Jesus’s head with an expensive burial ointment, Judas Iscariot protested this 
extravagance and “murmured against her.” Jesus said: “Why trouble ye her? she hath wrought a 
good work. …“She hath done what she could.”
166

“She hath done what she could”! What a succinct formula! …So how might we “do what we can”? 
For one thing, we can, as King Benjamin taught, cease withholding our means because we see the 
poor as having brought their misery upon themselves. Perhaps some have created their own 
difficulties, but don’t the rest of us do exactly the same thing? Isn’t that why this compassionate 
ruler asks, “Are we not all beggars?” Don’t we all cry out for help and hope and answers to 
prayers? Don’t we all beg for forgiveness for mistakes we have made and troubles we have 
caused? Don’t we all implore that grace will compensate for our weaknesses, that mercy will 
triumph over justice at least in our case? Little wonder that King Benjamin says we obtain a 
remission of our sins by pleading to God, who compassionately responds, but we retain a 
remission of our sins by compassionately responding to the poor who plead to us.
In addition to taking merciful action in their behalf, we should also pray for those in need. A group 
of Zoramites, considered by their fellow congregants to be “filthiness” and “dross”—those are 
scriptural words—were turned out of their houses of prayer “because of the coarseness of their 
[wearing] apparel.” They were, Mormon says, “poor as to things of the world; and also … poor in 
heart”—two conditions that almost always go together. Missionary companions Alma and Amulek 
counter that reprehensible rejection of the shabbily dressed by telling them that whatever 
privileges others may deny them, they can always pray—in their fields and in their houses, in their 
families and in their hearts. But then, to this very group who had themselves been turned away, 
Amulek says, “After [you] have [prayed], if [you] turn away the needy, and the naked, and visit not 
the sick and afflicted, and impart of your substance, if [you] have [it], to those who stand in need—
I say unto you, … your prayer is vain, and availeth you nothing, and [you] are as hypocrites who do 
deny the faith.”What a stunning reminder that rich or poor, we are to “do what we can” when 
others are in need.
Now, lest I be accused of proposing quixotic global social programs or of endorsing panhandling 
as a growth industry, I reassure you that my reverence for principles of industry, thrift, selfreliance, and ambition is as strong as that of any man or woman alive. We are always expected to 
help ourselves before we seek help from others. Furthermore, I don’t know exactly how each of 
you should fulfill your obligation to those who do not or cannot always help themselves. But I 
know that God knows, and He will help you and guide you in compassionate acts of discipleship if 
you are conscientiously wanting and praying and looking for ways to keep a commandment He 
has given us again and again.
You will recognize that I speak here of difficult societal needs that go well beyond members of the 
Church. Fortunately the Lord’s way of assisting our own is
167

easier: all who are physically able are to observe the law of the fast. Isaiah wrote: “Is not this the 
fast that I have chosen? …Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor 
that are cast out to thy house? when thou seest the naked, that thou cover him … ? [that thou] 
undo the heavy burdens, and … let the oppressed go free … ?”
I bear witness of the miracles, both spiritual and temporal, that come to those who live the law of 
the fast. I bear witness of the miracles that have come to me.
Truly, as Isaiah recorded, I have cried out in the fast more than once, and truly God has 
responded, “Here I am.” Cherish that sacred privilege at least monthly, and be as generous as 
circumstances permit in your fast offering and other humanitarian, educational, and missionary 
contributions. I promise that God will be generous to you, and those who find relief at your hand 
will call your name blessed forever. More than three-quarters of a million members of the Church 
were helped last year through fast offerings administered by devoted bishops and Relief Society 
presidents. That is a lot of grateful Latter-day Saints.
Brothers and sisters, such a sermon demands that I openly acknowledge the unearned, 
undeserved, unending blessings in my life, both temporal and spiritual. Like you, I have had to 
worry about finances on occasion, but I have never been poor, nor do I even know how the poor 
feel. Furthermore, I do not know all the reasons why the circumstances of birth, health, education, 
and economic opportunities vary so widely here in mortality, but when I see the want among so 
many, I do know that “there but for the grace of God go I.” I also know that although I may not be 
my brother’s keeper, I am my brother’s brother, and “because I have been given much, I too must 
give.”
In that regard, I pay a personal tribute to President Thomas Spencer Monson. I have been blessed by an 
association with this man for 47 years now, and the image of him I will cherish until I die is of him flying 
home from then–economically devastated East Germany in his house slippers because he had given 
away not only his second suit and his extra shirts but the very shoes from off his feet. “How beautiful upon the 
mountains [and shuffling through an airline terminal] are the feet of him that bringeth good tidings, that 
publisheth peace.” More than any man I know, President Monson has “done all he could” for the widow and the 
fatherless, the poor and the oppressed.
168

The Importance of Economic Virtue
The market system provides a significant amount of economic freedom in the decisions and choices 
groups and individuals make. And as we know in a system of free agency, not all choices made are good 
ones. A self-interest that gives way to selfishness can be seen in the desire to accumulate a fortune 
regardless of consequence, flaunt riches, exploit advantages, and maintain a superior position for its own 
sake. Greed and selfishness can lead individuals to either try to take advantage of others for their own 
benefit or to take advantage of the system and reap where they have not sown. That type of success 
without economic virtue can be at the expense of others and to the detriment of the free market system 
as a whole.
It is possible to circumvent or manipulate the natural laws of supply and demand. Monopolies of markets 
can develop, charge inflated prices, offer poor service and products, leaving the consumer at their mercy. 
Without competition, businesses have no incentive to improve or regulate quality. Producers can take 
advantage of consumers by knowingly selling poor products. Employers can take advantage of 
employees by paying wages below what would be considered an honest day’s pay for an honest day’s 
work. These employers then take advantage of the social safety net that must be provided by taxpayers 
to breach the gap between earned wages and the basic cost of living. In the case of employee wages, if 
there is a large number of people seeking a limited number of jobs, employers have no inherent 
responsibility to pay a fair wage.
A purely capitalist economic system would be based on the principles of laissez faire, where the 
government would literally leave the market alone. If such a system existed, and it does not, the only 
regulation of the market would be the natural laws of supply and demand. And as we see, those natural 
laws can be circumvented and manipulated in a world that lacks economic virtue. As individuals, groups, 
and businesses become more determined to seek the full extent of their economic self- interest, 
selfishness and greed and a focus on money in personal and public activities increases. What often 
follows is an exploitation of workers, exploitation of consumers, and a breakdown of the market system.
In an environment without economic virtue, people look to other options to channel economic selfinterest and rein in the excesses of the free market.
Government is called to step in, exert its control through increased regulation, and prevent less than 
virtuous activities. Keep in mind that it is a myth that the free market economy means less government. A 
strong, functioning government is key to the successful operation of the market system. Without the 
enforcement of the rule of law, without property rights and free exchange, in an atmosphere of anarchy 
without guarantees and protections of the fruits of labor, there would be limited productive economic 
activity.
169

Beyond those basic guarantees provided by a healthy republic, however, government has become the 
protector of the people from the negative consequences of greed and dishonesty. The government 
becomes the arbiter and enforcer of economic virtue. Laws are established to protect the people and to 
make sure that businesses conform to ethical standards. Internal controls on industry— inspections, 
rules, licensing requirements—can help root out corruption and make consumers safe from dangerous 
products and protect workers. Monopolies are discouraged to maintain competition with regulatory 
practices.
As the government has stepped in to try to protect citizens from this lack of economic virtue, society has 
lost a certain amount of economic freedom and also a certain level of economic responsibility and selfreliance. Freedom declines in the market place, businesses are tempted to find loopholes that allow them 
to circumvent the laws, and the people are tempted to take the law into their own hands.
Corruption and scandal are not an unavoidable feature of the market system. Properly understood, the 
market system means economic freedom under the rule of law, which protects natural rights and 
channels self-interest for the good of all.
Corruption and malfeasance — theft, misrepresentation, manipulation, fraud—take those rights away, 
and do not leave the market “free.”
As our country loses its cultural values of hard work, thrift, and sense of individual responsibility, it then 
must rely more on government to restrain its
excesses, distribute its wealth, and support its people. If we can’t regulate ourselves, then the 
government will take on more regulatory functions. If we can’t be charitable voluntarily, the government 
will redistribute money by force and taxation. All of this means a decline in economic liberty. When moral 
virtues decline, free market institutions decline as well.
The following section on the Progressive Movement examines a key period in American history, and 
offers a case study of technological change, a decline in economic virtue, revolutionary market growth, 
and the government and societal responses to those challenges.
The Progressive Era Responds to the Lack of Economic Virtue and 
Unequal Distribution of Wealth
Introduction
As discussed in Lesson 7, industrialization led to many changes in American society. After the Civil War, 
the growth of transportation networks through the building of cross-continental railroads and 
170

communication systems in the telegraph and telephone transformed America. Railroads in particular 
spurred on a multiplier effect— needing land, labor, and materials, creating other industries in coal, 
wood, and steel. The companies that controlled these industries became very rich, very fast, and were 
entrenched in their monopolies over all levels of production.
The country, tied together by these 
networks like never before, became a 
nationwide market to which goods 
could be shipped via railroad. This led 
to a standardization of tastes and 
goods, the creation of national 
newspapers and magazines, and a 
general explosion of bureaucracy and 
economic complexity. Western 
settlement followed the railroad, as 
millions homesteaded and built up new 
towns along its path. As the steel 
railroads grew horizontally across the 
landscape, steel girders led to the 
vertical growth and expansion of American cities with skyscrapers and tenement living. These urban 
centers became magnets for immigration as well as for worker exploitation, political corruption, crime, 
and poverty.
Many different groups looked at these massive changes in this era with fear and foreboding. All had 
entered an unknown world, where assumptions that had governed life before were no longer valid. This 
was a different nation than the one that had existed in the relatively farm-based life before the Civil War. 
It is from this environment that the Progressive Reform Movement emerged. There was concern over 
immigration and the changing face of American cities, over the unprecedented economic concentration 
of wealth and power amongst what many considered
“Robber Barons,” alarm at working conditions and the exploitation of child labor, concerns about food 
safety, and attempts to make the political system more responsive and more democratic.
It was not one group of reformers; rather it was different groups coming together for different reasons 
and with different goals. Most were middle-class Americans who felt marginalized between the growing 
immigrant populations and the power of wealthy capitalists. Much of the stimulus for Progressive reform 
came out of a commonly-held recognition that industrialization in America had significantly affected the 
171

practice of economic, social, and political virtue and the equal (or in this case unequal) distribution of 
economic wealth and social opportunity. The Progressives fought against the idea that government had 
no role to play in regulating economic virtue or protecting workers in a capitalist system. The 
Progressives believed in what was called journalistic “muckraking,” that if the American people were 
exposed to the ugly truth of what industrialization had wrought, they would work within the system to 
create change for the benefit of all.
As the nation was now more interconnected, these attempts at “muckraking” could reach a larger 
audience of readers far and wide. One of the most powerful examples of this type of journalism was 
Upton Sinclair’s The Jungle, a 1906 exposé of the meatpacking industry and its exploited workers in 
Chicago. Sinclair’s goal was to portray the failures of capitalism so dramatically that readers would be 
willing to accept his suggestion that capitalism be scrapped in favor of socialism. Many reforms came as a 
result of Sinclair’s graphic portrayal of the industry and his description of the trials of a particular
immigrant family. But as Sinclair remarked later, “I aimed at the public’s heart and by accident hit its 
stomach.” As you read the following excerpt from The Jungle, imagine what its impact might be to a public 
unaware of both the worker’s lives and the unsanitary conditions in which the food they ate was 
produced.
Excerpts from Upton Sinclair, The Jungle (1906):
Let a man so much as scrape his finger pushing a truck in the pickle rooms, and he might have a sore 
that would put him out of the world; all the joints in his fingers might be eaten by the acid, one by one. 
Of the butchers and floorsmen, the beef-boners and trimmers, and all those who used knives, you could 
scarcely find a person who had the use of his thumb; time and time again the base of it had been 
slashed, till it was a mere lump of flesh against which the man pressed the knife to hold it. The hands of 
these men would be criss-crossed with cuts, until you could no longer pretend to count them or to trace 
them. They would have no nails, – they had worn them off pulling hides; their knuckles were swollen so 
that their fingers spread out like a fan. 
There were men who worked in the cooking rooms, in the midst of steam and sickening odors, by 
artificial light; in these rooms the germs of tuberculosis might live for two years, but the supply was 
renewed every hour. There were the beef-luggers, who carried two-hundred-pound quarters into the 
refrigerator-cars; a fearful kind of work, that began at four o’clock in the morning, and that wore out the 
most powerful men in a few years. 
There were those who worked in the chilling rooms, and whose special disease was rheumatism; the 
time limit that a man could work in the chilling rooms was said to be five years. There were the woolpluckers, whose hands went to pieces even sooner than the hands of the pickle men; for the pelts of the 
172

sheep had to be painted with acid to loosen the 
wool, and then the pluckers had to pull out this 
wool with their bare hands, till the acid had 
eaten their fingers off. There were those who 
made the tins for the canned meat; and their 
hands, too, were a maze of cuts, and each cut 
represented a chance for blood poisoning. 
Some worked at the stamping machines, and it 
was very seldom that one could work long there 
at the pace that was set, and not give out and 
forget himself and have a part of his hand 
chopped off. 
There were the “hoisters,” as they were called, 
whose task it was to press the lever which lifted 
the dead cattle off the floor. They ran along 
upon a rafter, peering down through the damp 
and the steam; and as old Durham’s architects 
had not built the killing room for the convenience of the hoisters, at every few feet they would have to
stoop under a beam, say four feet above the one they ran on; which got them into the habit of stooping, 
so that in a few years they would be walking like chimpanzees …
With one member trimming beef in a cannery, and another working in a sausage factory, the family had 
first-hand knowledge of the great majority of Packingtown swindles. For it was the custom, as they 
found, whenever meat was so spoiled that it could not be used for anything else, either to can it or else 
to chop it up into sausage. With what had been told them by Jonas who had worked in the pickle rooms, 
they could now study the whole of the spoiled-meat industry on the inside, and read a new and grim 
meaning into that old Packingtown jest—that they use everything of the pig except the squeal … There 
was never the least attention paid to what was cut up for sausage; there would come all the way back 
from Europe old sausage that had been rejected, and that was moldy and white—it would be dosed 
with borax and glycerin, and dumped into the hoppers, and made over again for home consumption. 
There would be meat that had tumbled out on the floor, in the dirt and sawdust, where the workers had 
tramped and spit uncounted billions of consumption germs. 
There would be meat stored in great piles in rooms; and the water from leaky roofs would drip over it, 
and thousands of rats would race about on it. It was too dark in these storage places to see well, but a 
man could run his hand over these piles of meat and sweep off handfuls of the dried dung of rats. These 
rats were nuisances, and the packers would put poisoned bread out for them; they would die, and then 
173

rats, bread, and meat would go into the hoppers together. This is no fairy story and no joke; the meat 
would be shoveled into carts, and the man who did the shoveling would not trouble to lift out a rat even 
when he saw one— there were things that went into the sausage in comparison with which a poisoned 
rat was a tidbit. There was no place for the men to wash their hands before they ate their dinner, and so 
they made a practice of washing them in the water that was to be ladled into the sausage. There were 
the butt-ends of smoked meat, and the scraps of corned beef, and all the odds and ends of the waste of 
the plants, that would be dumped into old barrels in the cellar and left there. Under the system of rigid 
economy which the packers enforced, there were some jobs that it only paid to do once in a long time, 
and among these was the cleaning out of the waste barrels. 
Every spring they did it; and in the barrels would be dirt and rust and old nails and stale water– and 
cartload after cartload of it would be taken up and dumped into the hoppers with fresh meat, and sent 
out to the public's breakfast. Some of it they would make into “smoked” sausage – but as the smoking 
took time, and was therefore expensive, they would call upon their chemistry department, and preserve 
it with borax and color it with gelatin to make it brown. All of their sausage came out of the same bowl, 
but when they came to wrap it they would stamp some of it “special,” and for this they would charge two 
cents more a pound.
Largely as a result of public pressure created by the response to The Jungle, Congress passed two pieces 
of groundbreaking reform legislation to protect and regulate the food supply with health and safety 
standards; the Pure Food and Drug Act (1906), and the Meat Inspection Act (1906).
Another focus of the Progressives was the working conditions created by the transition to industrial 
production. “8 hours for work, 8 hours for sleep, 8 hours for what we will” became a popular slogan that 
helped drive the move toward organized labor and the creation of unions. Reformers focused on the 
issues of child labor, workplace safety and sanitary conditions, and quality of life protection with 
maximum hour laws. One of the most exploited classes of workers in this era was children. Children had 
always been a key part of the home economy throughout history, but with the transition to large-scale 
manufacturing, their role had changed. Children were utilized in coal mines for their size to get in small 
spaces, and for their small fingers to work industrial machines. They were also seen as easier to manage, 
cheaper to pay, and less likely to organize together in unions or disrupt production with strikes. Shocking 
pictures of children working in atrocious conditions were often the focus of muckraking photographers. 
Ending child labor in factories was tied to the movement towards free, compulsory education for all 
children. Federal efforts to outlaw child labor did not succeed until 1938, as previous attempts were 
declared unconstitutional.
One of the most dramatic incidents that demonstrated the need for workplace safety regulation was the 
Triangle Shirtwaist Fire in New York City. This factory had been the focus of union activity and protest in 
174

the years leading up to the tragedy. The factory caught fire in early 1911, trapping hundreds of workers, 
largely young immigrant women, on the top floors of the building. Blocked exits, locked doors to prevent 
stealing, and generally unsafe working conditions created a tragedy where 147 workers died trapped in 
the building and overcome by fire or after jumping to their death in terror. Those who died were seen as 
victims of greed. One magazine which covered the trial that followed, in which the owners were acquitted 
of wrongdoing, stated “Nine months ago 147 persons, chiefly young women and girls, were killed by a fire 
in the factory of the Triangle Waist Company … There are no guilty. There are only the dead, and the 
authorities will forget the case as speedily as possible. Capital can commit no crime when it is in pursuit 
of profits. Of course, it is well known that those who were killed in the Triangle disaster are only part, and 
a small part, of those murdered in industry during the passing year.” The media attention to this incident 
became a rallying cry for those who pushed for workplace safety regulations on the state and federal 
level. The sign, “These doors must remain open during business hours” and clearly marked fire exits are 
some of the still visible remnants of these changes.
The lives of workers and their struggles in muckraking journals stood in dramatic contrast to the lifestyles 
of the industrialists of the era. Andrew Carnegie was one of the most famous beneficiaries of 
industrialization in America in the late 19th century, a time when the phrase “millionaire” was invented. 
Carnegie was regarded as the quintessential example of America’s “rags to riches” stereotype, starting 
out as a poor Scottish immigrant and ending up directing one of the largest steel companies in America. 
Men like Carnegie were very aware that their unprecedented and extreme wealth was in stark contrast to 
the impoverished cities and hardscrabble working conditions. Although Carnegie was a generous 
philanthropist, many saw him as a “robber baron” that unjustly cornered markets and unfairly treated his 
workers. Carnegie’s company was the focus of one of the most famous worker’s strikes and union 
organizing attempts of the era— the 1892 Homestead Strike in Pennsylvania amongst iron and steel 
workers. His company’s controversial decision to call in private security and the state militia to reign in 
the worker’s strike resulted in violence and deaths on both sides. The way he dealt with labor struggles 
helped define his legacy and tarnished his reputation.
In the following excerpt, Carnegie attempted to explain and justify his view of wealth and how it should 
operate in society. Carnegie focused his charity on libraries throughout the country, many of which are 
still in operation today.
Excerpts from Andrew Carnegie, “The Gospel of Wealth” (1889):
The problem of our age is the proper administration of wealth, so that the ties of brotherhood may still 
bind together the rich and poor in harmonious relationship. The conditions of human life have not only 
been changed, but revolutionized, within the past few hundred years…This change, however, is not to be 
175

deplored, but welcomed as highly beneficial. It is well, nay, essential for the progress of the race, that the 
houses of some should be homes for all that is highest and best in literature and the arts, and for all the 
refinements of civilization, rather than that none should be so. Much better this great irregularity than
universal squalor.
… Not evil, but good, has come to the race from the accumulation of wealth by those who have the 
ability and energy that produce it. But even if we admit for a moment that it might be better for the race 
to discard its present foundation, Individualism,— that it is a nobler ideal that man should labor, not for 
himself alone, but in and for a brotherhood of his fellows, and share with them all in common … This is 
not evolution, but revolution … We might as well urge the destruction of the highest existing type of man 
because he failed to reach our ideal as favor the destruction of Individualism, Private Property, the Law 
of Accumulation of Wealth, and the Law of Competition; for these are the highest results of human 
experience, the soil in which society so far has produced the best fruit. Unequally or unjustly, perhaps, 
as these laws sometimes operate, and imperfect as they appear to the Idealist, they are, nevertheless, 
like the highest type of man, the best and most valuable of all that humanity has yet accomplished.
There remains, then, only one mode of using great fortunes; but in this we have the true antidote for the 
temporary unequal distribution of wealth, the reconciliation of the rich and the poor— a reign of 
harmony— another ideal, differing, indeed, from that of the Communist in requiring only the further 
evolution of existing conditions, not the total overthrow of our civilization. It is founded upon the 
present most intense individualism, and the race is projected to put it in practice by degree whenever it 
pleases. Under its sway we shall have an ideal state, in which the surplus wealth of the few will become, 
in the best sense the property of the many, because administered for the common good, and this 
wealth, passing through the hands of the few, can be made a much more potent force for the elevation 
of our race than if it had been distributed in small sums to the people themselves. Even the poorest can 
be made to see this, and to agree that great sums gathered by some of their fellow-citizens and spent 
for public purposes, from which the masses reap the principal benefit, are more valuable to them than 
if scattered among them through the course of many years in trifling amounts … Such, in my opinion, is 
the true Gospel concerning Wealth, obedience to which is destined someday to solve the problem of the 
Rich and the Poor, and to bring “Peace on earth, among men Good-Will.”
In response to the growth of business monopolies that controlled all levels and aspects of production and 
distribution, Progressives lobbied for reforms that attempted to force monopolies apart and allow 
competition. The Sherman Anti- Trust Act (1890) passed by Congress under its interstate commerce 
clause declared: 
“Every contract, combination in the form of trust or otherwise, or conspiracy, in restraint of trade or 
commerce among the several States, or with foreign nations, is... illegal. Every person who shall 
176

monopolize, or attempt to monopolize, or combine or conspire with any other person or persons, to
monopolize any part of the trade or commerce among the several States, or with foreign nations, shall 
be deemed guilty of a felony.”
Partly in response to the wealth of the men like Carnegie and the need for increased federal revenue, the 
16th Amendment (1913) was passed— “The Congress shall have power to lay and collect taxes on 
incomes, from whatever source derived, without apportionment among the several States, and without 
regard to any census or enumeration.” Before the passage of this amendment, federal revenue was 
derived mainly from customs tariffs and excise taxes.
Progressives focused also on the problem of political corruption both on the state and federal level, 
including the control of state legislatures by monopolistic businesses, control of local politics by city 
machines and ward bosses, and the spoils system where elected officials rewarded their supporters with 
government jobs and contracts. The opportunities for self-enrichment in political service were most 
famously described by George Washington Plunkitt, a political boss from Tammany Hall in New York City. 
In 1905 he published a memoir in which he detailed his use of “graft,” various schemes that led public 
officials to benefit financially through corruption, a problem that plagued many large cities and 
threatened faith in both government and public virtue.
Excerpts from George Washington Plunkitt, Plunkitt of Tammany Hall 
(1905):
Everybody is talkin’ these days about Tammany men growin’ rich on graft, but nobody thinks of drawin‘ 
the distinction between honest graft and dishonest graft. There’s all the difference in the world between 
the two. Yes, many of our men have grown rich in politics. I have myself. I’ve made a big fortune out of 
the game...
There’s an honest graft, and I’m an example of how it works. I might sum up the whole thing by sayin’: “I 
seen my opportunities and I took ’em.”
Just let me explain by examples. My party’s in power in the city, and it’s goin’ to undertake a lot of public 
improvements. Well, I’m tipped off, say, that they’re going to lay out a new park at a certain place.
I see my opportunity and I take it. I go to that place and I buy up all the land I can in the neighborhood. 
Then the board of this or that makes its plan public, and there is a rush to get my land, which nobody 
cared particular for before.
Ain’t it perfectly honest to charge a good price and make a profit on my investment and foresight? Of 
course, it is. Well, that’s honest graft. Or supposin’ it’s a new bridge they’re goin’ to build. I get tipped off 
177

and I buy as much property as I can that has to be taken for approaches. I sell at my own price later on 
and drop some more money in the bank.
Wouldn’t you? It’s just like lookin’ ahead in Wall Street or in the coffee or cotton market. It’s honest graft, 
and I’m lookin’ for it every day in the year. I will tell you frankly that I’ve got a good lot of it, too…
Now, in conclusion, I want to say that I don’t own a dishonest dollar. If my worst enemy was given the 
job of writin’ my epitaph when I’m gone, he couldn’t do more than write: “George W. Plunkitt. He Seen 
His Opportunities, and He Took ‘Em.”
Progressives spearheaded several reforms to try to open up the political process and give more power to 
the middle-class and away from big business interests or entrenched political bosses. Several states 
passed reforms by which individuals or groups could organize to put initiatives on the ballot, pass 
referendums on the actions of state legislatures, and put in place ways in which elected leaders could be 
recalled (IRR reforms) as well as create what was hoped to be a fairer primary system. On the national 
level, amendments to the Constitution were passed; the 17th Amendment (the direct election of senators 
instead of being chosen by state legislatures) and the 19th Amendment (voting rights for women).
Several common themes linked all of these Progressives together. They all had faith in reform and 
believed that wrongs could be made right. They had faith in scientific process and believed that science 
and technology would allow them to identify, understand, and solve problems. And they all had faith in 
the power of government as the ultimate tool of change and reform. These documents from the 
Progressive Era demonstrate the difficulties faced by this new industrial order, and began a debate over 
the proper role of government and the need for reforms and protections. There were other political 
challenges in this era—socialism, anarchism, communism, and radicalism—but Progressives on the whole 
tried to improve existing systems within capitalism and the Constitution; they did not argue for a fullscale revolution.
In many ways, this era marks the beginning of modern American liberalism and the increased emphasis 
on ideological differences in American politics. As a result of the changes wrought by the Progressive Era, 
modern liberals began to believe that the result of classical liberalism (a limited government that allows 
people to be as free as possible from undue restraints, encumbrances, and regulation of their activities) 
is a rather “negative” freedom. Why? Because classical liberalism with limited government allowed those 
with power in society the freedom to abuse a majority of the people economically and politically.
Classical liberalism allowed for economic tyranny of the rich over the poor because laissez faire 
capitalism resulted in the creation of monopolies that took advantage of consumers and workers. 
Classical Liberalism also worked against democracy, because too much political power became vested in
the hands of the politically elite or the economically powerful and common people had little power in 
178

political decisions. Modern liberals (progressives) felt that a limited government only conferred a 
tenuous, “negative” kind of freedom on people, a freedom that did not protect people from the evils of 
modern society. In that context, modern liberals began to believe that the burdens of freedom (both the 
political freedom that results from notions of limited government and the economic freedom that comes 
from capitalism and free market economics) are too great for the people to bear without restraint and 
protection. They believed that a “positive” freedom can only be conferred by the intervention of a vigilant 
government that protected the people from economic abuse, exploitation, and discrimination within the 
bounds of the capitalist system. These progressive ideas about the role of modern liberalism would go on 
to set the stage for future reform periods in times of challenge like the New Deal in the 1930s and the 
Great Society in the 1960s.