
Week 2: Introduction

This course is entitled American Heritage and will be an exploration of the foundational principles that
underlie American tradition and culture. The material covers the basic political, economic, and religious
ideas that supported the founding and creation of the United States with a general thematic and
chronological overview of its history and struggles. However, unlike American history courses taught at
other universities, it is also focused on the responsibility of teaching to a specific and unique group of
students who are also members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. For this reason, the
course will examine these principles in light of what we can learn from church leaders and the scriptures
and the ways in which those true principles can be seen as contributing to the formation of good
government and society.

It is our goal that the answers to these questions will provide you with a solid foundation of knowledge
that you can build on throughout this semester. We know that “it is [God’s] will that [we] should hasten to
… obtain a knowledge of history, and of countries, and of kingdoms, of laws of God and man” (D&C
93:53). Therefore, we encourage you to think critically about these principles and test them out through
personal observation and studying it out in your mind. Like Paul instructed to the Thessalonians, “Prove
all things; hold fast that which is good” (1 Thessalonians 5:21).

Why the study of American Heritage is valuable

The United States as a Light and a Land of Hope

The first Puritan settlers to the American continent borrowed the ph rase “a city that is set on a hill” from
the New Testament to describe their venture into the New World. 1 The Puritan religious mission was to
purify the Church of England and to stand before the world as an example of a true religious community.
That idea of mission, the idea that the land that became the United States was unique in its influence and
place in the world, has remained. During the revolutionary period this idea evolved into the first example
of true liberty and self-government the world had ever seen. This sense of mission can be seen
throughout the history of the United States, including in America’s continuing efforts to spread peace and
democracy throughout the world.

Throughout its history, the United States has stood as a beacon of hope for a better life.



12


“The western hemisphere was inhabited by people who had come from elsewhere, unwilling to
settle for the conditions into which they were born and drawn by the prospect of a new beginning,
the lure of freedom, and the space to pursue their ambitions in ways their respective Old Worlds
did not permit. Hope has both theological and secular meanings, spiritual ones as well as material
ones. Both these sets of meanings exist in abundance in America. In fact, nothing about America
better defines its distinctive character than the ubiquity of hope, a sense that the way things are
initially given to us cannot be the final word about them, that we can never settle for that. Even
those who are bitterly critical of America, and find its hopes to be delusions, cannot deny the
enduring energy of those hopes and are not immune to their pull.”

2 This assertion that the United States has a divine mission as a light unto the world does not mean that

God has led or approved of everything that has happened throughout the history of the country.
Mistakes have been made in the history of the United States. Moroni gave really great counsel for how to
use these mistakes to our benefit when he said, “Rather give thanks unto God that he had made manifest
unto you our imperfections, that ye may learn to be more wise than we have been” (Mormon 9:31).
Therefore, the hope for a better life, which exists because of the divine principles on which this nation
was founded, has blessed innumerable people and continues to shine and beckon.

The United States as the Host Nation for the Restoration of the Gospel

Church doctrines also teach about the special mission of the United States. The true mission of the
United States as outlined in scripture and the teachings of prophets is for it to be a preserved and
protected place for religious liberty against tyranny and oppression. It is also the place from which the
“law” of the Lord “shall go forth” throughout the world.

“Wherefore, I will consecrate this land unto thy s eed, and them who shall
be numbered among thy seed, forever, for the land of their inheritance;
for it is a choice land, saith God unto me, above all other lands, wherefore
I will have all men that dwell thereon that they shall worship me, saith
God.” 3

“B ehold, this is a choice land, and whatsoever nation shall possess it shall
be free from bondage, and from captivity, and from all other nations
under heaven, if they will but serve the God of the land, who is Jesus
Christ, who hath been manifested by the t hings which we have written.” 4



13


“And many nations shall come, and say, Come, and let us go up to the mountains of the Lord and
to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths; for
the law shall go forth of Zion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.”

5 The United States has a mission outlined in scripture and prophecy to be a choice land where a free

people can worship. As part of that mission, it was the only place where the gospel of Jesus Christ could
be restored to the earth in the latter days. As President Joseph F. Smith taught,

“This great American nation the Almighty raised up by the power of his omnipotent hand, that it
might be possible in the latter days for the kingdom of God to be established in the earth. If the
Lord had not prepared the way by laying the foundations of this glorious nation, it would have
been impossible (under the stringent laws and bigotry of the monarchical governments of the
world) to have laid the foundations for the c oming of his great kingdom. The Lord has done this.” 6

Although the restoration of the Gospel began in the United States, it continues to unfold in nations
throughout the world. This is being accomplished in large part because the foundational principles
embodied in the Declaration of Independence and manifest in the U.S. Constitution have spread to other
nations. These two documents carry with them the pattern for an environment of freedom that is ideal
for our human experience. The spread of these principles and the opportunity they provide for freedom
of religion and choice is part of the great work of the gathering of Israel.

The following glossary defines and explains the major principles we will be exploring this semester. Many
of these terms are connected with each other, working together to create a strong foundation. For the
most part these principles go beyond the United States, meaning they apply to the formation of strong
societies in any part of the world. No one political party has a special claim on these principles, and there
are differences of opinion in their application. Pondering these principles will help as we navigate the
complex world of the political, economic, and cultural discourse. And as we examine the historical
foundations of the United States, we will see that the past was as complex as the present.

Principle Glossary

Agency and Accountability

Agency is the right to make decisions affecting our temporal and spiritual existence. It is the basis of any
“free” government and is the highest political good. Although agency is an eternal principle, earthly
governments can make laws restricting actions and the freedom to choose.



14


Individual choices can also result in personal or legal restrictions on the ability to act with full agency. The
wise use of agency by individuals often dictates how much freedom can safely exist in a society. Agency
cannot truly exist unless it exists alongside accountability. In order to be accountable for one’s actions,
one must have agency but also have sufficient knowledge to make a reasoned choice. Eternally, people
will not be held accountable for choices made in ignorance.

Temporally, however, many decisions have physical and civic consequences despite this lack of
knowledge. Members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints have an obligation to exercise
their agency in their relationship with their government, “to act for themselves and not to be acted upon”
as they obey commandments and serve God.

Dallin H. Oaks described the relationship between agency and freedom this way:

“When I say free agency I refer to what scripture calls agency, which means an exercise of the will,
the power to choose. … When I say freedom, I mean the power and privilege to carry out our
choices. … Because free agency is a God-given precondition to the purpose of mortal life, no
person or organization can take away our free agency in mortality. … What can be taken away or
reduced by the conditions of mortality is our freedom, the power to act upon our choices. Free
agency is absolute, but in the circumstances of mortality freedom is always qualified. Freedom may
be qualified or taken away (1) by physical laws, including the physical limitations with which we are
born, (2) by our own action, and (3) by the action of othe rs, including governments. …

We have to accept some government limitations on freedom if we who live in communities are to
have life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. A condition of uninhibited individual freedom would
allow the strong to oppress the weak. It would allow the eccentric desires of one person to restrict
the freedom of many. … Freedom is obviously of great importance, but … freedom is always
qualified in mortality.

Consequently, when we oppose a government-imposed loss of freedom, it would be better if we
did not conduct our debate in terms of a loss of our free agency, which is impossible under our
doctrine. We ought to focus on the legality or the wisdom of the proposed restriction of our
freedom.” 7

The following scriptures shed additional light on the meaning of the principle of agency and the
responsibility of citizens to be accountable for their actions in relation to government.



15


D&C 101: 78—That every man may act in doctrine and principle pertaining to futurity, according to
the moral agency which I have given unto him, that every man may be accountable for his own sins
in the day of judgment.

Moses 4:3–4—Wherefore, because that Satan rebelled against me, and sought to destroy the
agency of man, which I, the Lord God, had given him, and also, that I should give unto him mine
own power; by the power of mine Only Begotten, I caused that he should be cast down; and he
became Satan, yea, even the devil, the father of all lies, to deceive and to blind men, and to lead
them captive at his will, even as many as would not hearken unto my voice.

2 Nephi 2:27—Wherefore, men are free according to the flesh; and all things are given them which
are expedient unto man. And they are free to choose liberty and eternal life, through the great
Mediator of all men, or to choose captivity and death, according to the captivity and power of the
devil; for he seeketh that all men might be miserable like unto himself.

D&C 134:1—We believe that governments were instituted of God for the benefit of man; and that
he holds men accountable for their acts in relation to them, both in making laws and administering
them, for the good and safety of society.

Members of the Church have an Obligation to Government

Members of the Church have an obligation to honor, obey, and sustain the law, to study the principles of
good government, and to seek out wise individuals to represent them. In particular, members should be
familiar with the fundamentals of the Constitution, the history of issues in their locality, and the
complexity of different points of view. They should act as informed and participating citizens, and obey
the laws of the government in which they live. As the twelfth article of faith states, “We believe in being
subject to kings, presidents, rulers, and magistr ates, in obeying and honoring, and sustaining the law.”
This is also restated in Doctrine and Covenants 58:21—“Let no man break the laws of the land, for he that
keepeth the laws of God hath no need to break the laws of the land.”

An obligation to governme nt is closely tied to the concept of “public virtue.” Public virtue is characterized
by the spirit and actions of humility, justice, decency, honesty, and fairness in the public sphere, and also
includes a willingness to contribute to the public dialogue and feel a responsibility for the preservation of
good government.

The United States as a “Light Unto the World”

The first Puritan settlers borrowed the phrase “a city that is set on a hill” from the New Testament to
describe their venture into the New World. The Puritan religious mission was to purify the Church of
England and to stand before the world as an example of a true religious community.

16


That idea of mission—that what became the United States was unique in its influence and place in the
world—has remained. During the revolutionary period, this idea evolved into presenting the first example
of true liberty and self-government.

This sense of mission can be seen in the Manifest Destiny expansion of the West, America’s inroads into
the Pacific in 18 98, participation in both World Wars, and America’s continuing efforts to spread peace
and democracy throughout the world.

This assertion that the United States has a divine mission as a light unto the world must be made with
caution, as it does not mean that everything that has happened throughout the history of the country has
been led by God or correct in His eyes. It can be a difficult challenge to determine God’s influence versus
the natural consequences of agency and sin. The migration of peoples from Europe to the Americas was
foretold in scriptures, but did God also support the dislocation of native peoples, the institution of
slavery, racial segregation, and intolerance? America’s growing influence and power in the world can also
be supported by scriptures and the teachings of modern prophets, but suggesting that everything that
America has done is part of God’s will has negative consequences. First, it removes personal agency and
accountability from the process of decision making. Second, it creates a false and prideful attitude among
Americans toward the rest of the world.

Church doctrines also teach about the special mission of the United States but in a different context. The
true mission of the United States as outlined in scripture and the teachings of prophets is for it to be a
preserved and protected place for religious liberty against tyranny and oppression. It is also the place
from which the “law” of the Lord “shall go forth” throughout the world. Here are some prophetic
examples describing the mission of the land that would become the United States.

2 Nephi 10:19—Wherefore, I will consecrate this land unto thy seed, and them who shall be
numbered among thy seed, forever, for the land of their inheritance; for it is a choice land, saith
God unto me, above all other lands, wherefore I will have all men that dwell thereon that they
shall worship me, saith God.

Ether 2:12—Behold, this is a choice land, and whatsoever nation shall possess it shall be free
from bondage, and from captivity, and from all other nations under heaven, if they will but serve
the God of the land, who is Jesus Christ, who hath been manifested by the things which we have
written.

Micah 4:2—And many nations shall come, and say, Come, and let us go up to the mountain of the
Lord, and to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his
paths: for the law shall go forth of Zion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.

17


D&C 98:5–6—And that law of the land which is constitutional, supporting that principle of freedom
in maintaining rights and privileges, belongs to all mankind, and is justifiable before me.
Therefore, I, the Lord, justify you, and your brethren of my church, in befriending that law which is
the constitutional law of the land.

The United States as the “Proper Host Nation for the Restoration of the Gospel”

The United States has a mission outlined in scripture and prophecy to be a choice land where a free
people can worship. As part of that mission, it was the only place where the gospel of Jesus Christ could
be restored to the earth in the latter days. As President Joseph F. Smith taught,

“This great American nation the Almighty raised up by the power of his omnipotent hand, that it
might be possible in the latter days for the kingdom of God to be established in the earth. If the
Lord had not prepared the way by laying the foundations of this glorious nation, it would have
been impossible (under the stringent laws and bigotry of the monarchical governments of the
world) to have la id the foundations for the coming of his great kingdom. The Lord has done this.” 8

Although the gospel was restored in the United States, in a land of religious freedom, it was not an easy
road. The Saints experienced much hardship and persecution, even in this choice land. The early pioneers
had to flee what was then United States territory and take refuge outside its borders in the West.

The Doctrine of an Inspired Constitution

Church doctrine proclaims that the Constitution is more than just a document that created the
government of the United States. It is also an inspired work that contains “just and holy principles.” Here
are a few scriptures from Doctrine and Covenants that highlight this truth.

D&C 101:77, 80—According to the laws and constitution of the people, which I have

suffered to be established, and should be maintained for the rights and protection of all flesh,
according to just and holy principles; … And for this purpose have I established the Constitution of
this land, by the hands of wise men whom I raised up unto this very purpose, and redeemed the
land by the shedding of blood.

D&C 109:54—Have mercy, O Lord, upon all the nations of the earth; have mercy upon the rulers of
our land; may those principles, which were so honorably and nobly defended, namely, the
Constitution of our land, by our fathers, be established forever.



18


Latter-day prophets have also reinforced these teachings. Ezra Taft Benson spoke in a conference
address in 1987 and declared, “I reverence the Const itution of the United States as a sacred document.
To me its words are akin to the revelations of God, for God has placed his stamp of approval on the
Constitution of this land. I testify that the God of heaven selected and sent some of his choicest spirits to
lay the foundation of this government as a prologue to the restoration of the gospel and the second
coming of our Savior.” Dallin H. Oaks proclaimed in a 1992 talk that while not every line and word of the
Constitution was scriptural, there was “divine inspiration” in the great fundamentals of the Constitution.
His list of fundamentals included a bill of rights, division of powers, popular sovereignty, and the rule of
law. The men who wrote the Constitution were inspired by God, but were not perfect men. The
Constitution is proof that our Heavenly Father can use imperfect beings to further his work. One of the
inspired facets of the Constitution is its ability, through the amendment process, to grow and change.

A Republic Resting Upon Democratic and Republican Principles

This principle does not refer to current political parties. Instead, it references the philosophy of the
founders’ generation that explained the purpose and function of government, and informed their work as
they created the United States Constitution. For the founders, a government based on democratic and
republican principles received its legitimacy from the popular will of the people (popular sovereignty). It
protected the rights and privileges of the people, promoted a sense of equality, and focused on the
common good or “commonweal.”

As the colonies moved toward revolution and independence, the founders examined the lessons of world
history, looking closely at various forms of government to see what might be best suited to support those
principles. A monarchy, from their experience, did not embody the principles they wished to adopt. A
republic was a government where people elected wise, frugal, and virtuous representatives to make laws.
It was expected that those representatives would accurately reflect the will of the people but would weigh
the common good against the wishes of a particular group or faction. A democracy, where the people
themselves made the laws, was also examined, but there was a fear of too much democracy, and the
passions of human beings focusing on their own wants and desires rather than the good of the whole.

The founders chose to adopt a republic as the proper form of government and hoped that this form
would best overcome the challenge of divisive factions and maintain true liberty. There are elements of
democracy with the voting for representatives, therefore some refer to the current form of government
in the United States as a “democratic republic.” There has also been a gradual “democratization” of the
republic, with the expansion of voting rights throughout its history.

19


Freedom of Conscience

This principle allows people to worship who, what, and how they may and protects people from the
tyranny of an established state church and its control. As it says in the Doctrine and Covenants 134:2,

“We believe that no government can exist in peace, except such laws are framed and held inviolate
as will secure to each individual the free exercise of conscience.” This right also protects the ability
of people to speak out on political issues and is the heart of self-government.

During the revolutionary period, the debate over liberty raised the freedom of conscience to the level of a
natural right, equal to the rights of life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.

Rule of Law

Strictly defined, the rule of law is the idea that a body of law exists to which all citizens are subject,
whatever their status, wealth, or position. Rule of law, applied equally to all people, is the basic principle
of good government. An appreciation for the rule of law motivates personal restraint and governs the
actions and relations between the government and the governed and between citizens. In the United
States, the Constitution is the fullest expression of this body of law. Self-restraint and reverence for the
rule of law is an important connecting principle. Without that restraint, a government must enact stricter
laws in order to maintain order, lessening the freedom in that civil society. As Marion G. Romney argued,
“When the ‘rule of law’ breaks down in a family, a community, a state, or a nation, chaos reigns.”

A Bill of Rights

The principle that citizens had rights granted by their king had a long tradition in England dating back to
the Magna Carta (1215) and the English Bill of Rights (1689). Those traditions were brought with the early
colonists and developed further in the revolutionary era as natural human rights replaced the idea of
rights from the crown. In the Declaration of Independence, life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness were
described as unalienable rights, given by God to man and therefore beyond the power of government to
restrict. This concept reached its highest expression in the Bill of Rights (the first ten amendments to the
Constitution). These amendments described the specific rights that were necessary to fulfill the rights
described in the Declaration. The tenth amendment indicates that there are other rights not outlined
specifically by the Constitution that cannot be denied by the government.

Popular Sovereignty

Popular sovereignty is the idea that political power originates from the people, and not from kings or
even elected officials. In the United States, the people, through the Constitution, delegate a portion of this

20


sovereignty to the government and to the elected officials and administrators of the government. Hence,
the Constitution’s preamble begins with these words:

“We, the people of the United States … do ordain and establish this Constitution.”

Separation of Powers (Branches of Government and Checks and Balances)

Separation of powers is the principle of dividing the power (or popular sovereignty) of the national level
of government into three branches. The executive, legislative, and judicial branches have divided and
complimentary responsibilities and specific roles to prevent the abuse of power in the other two
branches. These “checks and balances” are limitations on each branch’s ability to wield power. This
“separation” of sovereign powers embodies the idea that power concentrated has the ability to corrupt
even the best individuals. Therefore, dispersing power is one of the best checks on the corrupting
balance of political power.

There are many examples of how these checks and balances work in the three branches of government
established by the Constitution. The executive branch can veto legislation from the legislative branch
(Congress), but Congress can override a presidential veto and pass legislation with a certain number of
votes. The legislative branch can pass laws, but the judicial branch can declare those laws
unconstitutional. The executive branch appoints judges, but judges can be impeached by the legislative
branch. The president, as head of the executive branch, serves as commander in chief of the armed
forces, but the legislative branch must appropriate funds for the military and vote to declare war. The
executive branch nominates federal officials, but those nominees must be confirmed by the Senate.

Federalism (Division of Powers)

Political power (popular sovereignty) is also divided between national and state governments, under a
system called Federalism. This “division of power” means that through the Constitution, the people
delegate some of their political power to the national government and some power to the state
government. The tenth amendment, which is part of the Bill of Rights, clearly denotes the key concept of
F ederalism and states’ rights. The states have the power and ability to regulate the local welfare of their
constituents. The national government is there to protect the people against foreign threats and/or local
or state government abuse of their political power and equal protection under the law. Therefore,
Federalism recognizes that political power is best exercised when it is closest to the people, although
federal law is supreme over state law under the Constitution. The argument over the proper division of
powers between national and state governments continues to be a controversial theme of political
debate down to the present day.

21


True Liberty

True liberty is a balance between absolute freedom and absolute order and control. Historically, a state
of absolute freedom was anarchy, and the state of absolute order was tyranny. Neither anarchy nor
tyranny provide societies with peace, happiness, and stability. True liberty exists only where there is a
balance between law and order and the greatest degree of freedom that people can exercise (based on
the wise use of agency and self-restraint). A more virtuous people can enjoy liberty without descending
into anarchy. A less virtuous people requires more governmental restraint and can descend into tyranny.
Therefore, the principle of true liberty is closely related to the principle of the rule of law.

Provident Living and Self-Reliance

In economic terms, provident living is to live within your means, avoid debt, and prepare for the future.
The founders described it as “temperance” and believed it necessary for a society to succeed. As Robert
D. Hales taught in April 2009,

“All of us are responsible to provide for ourselves and our families in both temporal and spiritual
ways. To provide providently, we must practice the principles of provident living: joyfully living
within our means, being content with what we have, avoiding excessive debt, and diligently
saving and preparing for rainy-day emergencies. When we live providently, we can provide for
ourselves and our families and also follow the Savior’s example to serve and bless others.”

Self-reliance is the acceptance of personal responsibility for one’s own financ ial, spiritual, and political
well-being. As a principle, self-reliance is closely related to agency and accountability. It is the opposite of
the spirit of entitlement and a recognition that one can only reap what they have sown. Just as salvation is
an individual matter, so too is self-reliance. As Spencer W. Kimball taught,

“The responsibility for each person’s social, emotional, spiritual, physical, or economic well-being
rests first upon himself, second upon his family, and third upon the church if he is a faithful
member thereof. No true Latter-day Saint, while physically or emotionally able, will voluntarily
shift the burden of his own or his family’s well-being to someone else.”

Economic Freedom

Economic freedom is the opportunity to determine one’s own occupation, control the fruits of labor
(wages, salaries, the acquisition of property, or personal fulfillment), and freely engage in commercial
transactions in the disposition of one’s property. This atmosphere of freedom, along with the private
ownership of property, creates a sense of economic incentive which stimulates production and creativity.
The pursuit of happiness is tied to controlling the fruits of labor.

22


Conclusion

As the Lord instructs in Doctrine and Covenants 88:78–80,

“Teach ye dilige ntly and my grace shall attend you, that you may be instructed more perfectly in
theory, in principle, in doctrine, in the law of the gospel, in all things that pertain unto the kingdom
of God, that are expedient for you to understand; of things both in heaven and in the earth, and
under the earth; things which have been, things which are, things which must shortly come to
pass; things which are at home, things which are abroad; the wars and the perplexities of the
nations, and the judgments which are on the land; and a knowledge also of countries and of
kingdoms—that ye may be prepared in all things when I shall send you again to magnify the
calling whereunto I have called you, and the mission with which I have commissioned you.”

Later in Doctrine and Covenants 93:53, it says we should “obtain a knowledge of history, and of countries,
and of kingdoms, of laws of God and man, and all this for the salvation of Zion.” As students learn more
about the principles that have been outlined in this course, they will keep this commandment to be
aware, knowledgeable, and informed. They will be prepared to meet their responsibilities as citizens, as
church members, and to influence the political debate in the countries in which they live.

The Colonial Foundations

Prior to the arrival of the first Europeans to the western hemisphere, the region was inhabited by
numerous and diverse native populations. According to the Book of Mormon, these groups descended
from the Nephites and Lamanites. According to historical scholarship, these native peoples descended
from multiple migrations of people from Asia across the land bridge between what is now Russia and
Alaska. Regardless of the explanation, by the time of the first European contact, the native population

23


included as many as 75 million people who were deeply divided by geography, language, culture, trade
networks, and custom into sophisticated and advanced civilizations.

The first European travelers, like Christopher Columbus, were explorers and adventurers rather than
settlers. Initially, they sought a more direct route to the trade possibilities and riches of India and China.
In fact, Columbus attached the name “Indians” to the peoples he encountered since he thought he had
arrived in India, rather than a previously unknown continent. Explorers came from many different
European nations and created new trading routes, transferring the wealth of gold, silver, furs, corn,
potatoes, tomatoes, tobacco, and other raw materials from America to Europe. This “Columbian
Exchange” also brought European diseases to the native peoples, who had no immunity and died by the
millions. Some historians estimate that by the time permanent settlers were traveling to the New World
in the early 1600s, ninety percent of the pre-contact population had been wiped out.

24


This loss in population significantly impacted the relationship between the native peoples and the
Europeans. With their civilizations destroyed and with fewer numbers, Native Americans were ill
equipped to prevent European settlement, although there were violent skirmishes throughout the early
period. At the same time, as settlers arrived, they found abandoned villages and cleared fields that
provided a great asset to those creating agricultural-based colonies. Some settlers saw these emptied
lands as indicators of divine providence for their ventures, and proof of God’s hand guiding them in the
New World.

In the first flurry of exploration, trade, and initial settlement, it was unclear which European nation would
establish dominance in the western hemisphere, as several European powers made claims and inroads.
The Spanish and the Portuguese were the first after 1492 and into the early 1500s, bringing with them
the traditional politics of a strong central government under a divinely chosen and absolute monarch.
The Spanish and Portuguese also brought with them a strong connection between the king and the
Catholic church, as the state and church ruled together. As they encountered native peoples, they
expected them to give up their native traditions and convert to Catholicism, support king and empire, and
assimilate to the language and customs of the conquerors. The Catholic mission system was set up for
this purpose throughout Spanish areas of control. The economics of empire meant all wealth belonged to
the crown or church, although the

25


New World did provide individual adventurers the chance to gain wealth. For the most part, these
explorers expected to return to Europe to
enjoy the fruits of their adventures, and
therefore few women and children
emigrated to that part of the New World.
Permanent settlements developed later
from the descendants of the early
explorers and the native peoples.

The French arrived in the western
hemisphere after the Spanish and
Portuguese in the mid-1500s. With the
international competition among European
nations and the areas staked out by earlier
explorers, the French turned farther north
and claimed the territory surrounding the St. Lawrence River, the Great Lakes, and eventually the
Mississippi River drainage to the Gulf of Mexico.

Politically, the French brought with them a strong central government tradition under the rule of a
powerful king just like the Spanish. Religiously, the French also had a strong connection to the Catholic
church. Jesuit priest s, or the “Black Robes” as the natives called them, played a major role in expanding
French presence in the western hemisphere.

These men attempted to convert the native peoples to Catholicism with efforts somewhat less coercive
than the Spanish mission system. Many natives accepted baptism, but it was seldom a conversion that

26


led to a deep cultural transformation. The fact that native populations were more widely dispersed and
devastated by European diseases also hampered missionary efforts.

Economically, the French also came seeking wealth for the crown, but the French supply of gold and silver
never equaled the supply of those minerals
that could be extracted from Spanish and
Portuguese controlled areas in the south. The
wealth that the French found in the western
hemisphere came mostly from natural
resources: timber, fishing, and furs. This
wealth also belonged to the French king, but
the labor required to extract that wealth
encouraged more long term settlement. The
fur trade in particular required partnerships
with native peoples, as the French took part in
established trading patterns based on family
networks. This involvement often led to
marriages between French adventurers and
natives, helping break down language barriers and helping support access to trade.

The English were the last major European power to compete for colonies in the western hemisphere.
Because Spanish and French colonies were already established prior to their arrival, the English claimed
the territory that was left over between the southern Spanish and the northern French. The first
permanent colony in Jamestown, in what is today Virginia, was established in 1607. Farther north at
Plymouth, in modern day Massachusetts, the Pilgrims established a settlement in 1620. Both of these
colonies faced difficulty in their very survival. The first years saw more people die than survive in the
settlements during what was called the “starving time.” In both regions, English settlers found help from
Native Americans. This help was not without ulterior motives, as the natives, too, were trying to survive.
They faced a competitive environment where social, political, and economic structures had fallen into

27


disarray as a result of the waves of disease that had washed over the area since the appearance of the
first European explorers.

In addition to locating colonies geographically separate from the French and Spanish colonies, British
colonies looked and operated in significantly different ways than their European counterparts. Socially,
the British settlements were primarily family groups looking for permanent residence in the New World.
This was especially true in New England, where the Pilgrims and Puritans settled. The Pilgrims sought
freedom to worship outside the restrictions of the Church of England. The Puritans, as their name
implies, wished to purify the doctrines of the Church of England and live their religion freely. The pattern
of family settlement also traveled to the southern colonies, as the economic enterprises of Jamestown
and other settlements around the Chesapeake Bay quickly learned that for a long-term settlement to
survive it was necessary to provide wives and the stability of families. Thus, women in England were
offered a bounty of land if they agreed to sail and settle
in Virginia.

The Virginia Company represented an anomaly when
compared to the economic arrangements operated by
the Spanish and the French. While the monarchy in
France and Spain had direct economic control over
their colonies, the English model was one of private
investors pooling resources to establish a trading
company and then working with the crown to
economically develop areas claimed by the king. The
king still expected to receive a share of profits as
colonial wealth flowed back into the English treasury, but English joint stock companies like the Virginia
Company and the British East India Company were more like independent economic enterprises than the
royally controlled model used by the Spanish and French. This economic system was hardly modern
capitalism, but it had characteristics that foreshadowed the business practices that became its major
component.

In addition to the social and economic differences between British, French, and Spanish colonies, there
were religious differences as well. Whereas Spanish and French colonists came with the hope and goal of
converting natives to Catholicism, English colonists by this time were embroiled in the Protestant
Reformation. As England broke away from Catholicism and became Protestant, the king became the head
of the Church of England. But his political control over the colonies was seen as more important than
religious control. The expectation was that English colonists would be members of the Church of England,
but that expectation was loosely enforced. English colonists in North America who came for religious
reasons wanted distance from the Church of England or to purify it, not to spread its doctrines and

28


practices to the natives. It was not the religious freedom that we think of today, as communities enforced
religious dogma in different ways and still tied political and religious power together, but it was the start
of the conversation.

This very early period of discovery, exploration, and settlement of the western hemisphere contained the
seeds of political, economic, religious, and social traditions that have affected the cultural development of
the land that would someday become the United States. As the region was settled primarily by the British,
their influence significantly impacted the future traditions of the area. If Columbus had sailed further
north in 1492, the Chesapeake Bay may have been settled by the Spanish instead of the English. Despite
these common traditions and origins, the 13 original colonies were settled in very different patterns,
some as royal charters, others as private companies. The need for labor to extract New World wealth led
some colonies to develop labor practices that had not existed in England, as the large-scale agriculture of
the South drew upon the existing New World slave trade and created plantation economies. New
England, with its poor soil and harsh climate, was focused on small farming communities and the Atlantic
trade, and the middle colonies attracted a more heterogenous agricultural and commercial society. The
differences between the colonies would sometimes make common goals and agreement difficult.

British colonies in the New World built upon the cultural and political traditions they brought with them,
despite the thousands of miles of ocean and new environment. English colonists were proud of their
English heritage, history, and culture. A key tradition that traveled with them was the idea that as British
citizens, they had political rights and privileges. As far back as the Magna Carta in 1215, the protection of
a citizen’s basic rights, the requirement of witnesses for prosecution, the right to trial by jury, and
property rights had been established as protections against the power of the monarchy and ruling
classes. The English Bill of Rights, written in 1689, added the right to petition the government, to bear
arms, to have free elections, and to exercise free speech and the right of protection from excessive bail,
and it established the principles that duly established laws cannot be arbitrarily suspended and that taxes
cannot be levied without the consent of Parliament (the representatives of the people).

As subjects of the English crown, the settlers believed that, despite the distance from their homeland,
they retained the rights and privileges granted to Englishmen in England. They shared a strong
commitment to the principle of the rule of law. The English constitution, although not one single
document, was the codified laws and traditions that protected an Englishman’s rights and privileges.
British colonists living in North America considered themselves to be part of the freest and most
politically protected society anywhere on the earth.

British colonists also tried to recreate their homeland’s form of government, which balanced the three
different classes of British society. In England, much like most of Europe at the time, society was divided
along lines of social class. The monarchy (royal family), the nobility (families of land, wealth, title, and

29


status), and the democracy (everyone else) formed the three major social classes. In British government
the monarchy’s interests were represented by the king, the nobility’s interests by the House of Lords, and
the people’s interests by the House of Commons.

Since all three classes were represented in this form of government, it was felt to be balanced. As the
colonies developed, their governments were modeled on this pattern. A royal governor chosen by the
king ruled over the colony, an upper house of the colonial legislature appointed by the royal governor
stood to advise him on colonial matters and to represent the interests of men of wealth and status, and a
lower house of the colonial legislature was made up of members elected by the people to represent
them.

British colonists also revered British legal traditions and sought to establish a similar system in the
colonies. Judges were appointed by the king in England or the royal governor in America, and therefore,
the monarchy had a significant level of influence over the legal system. However, the legal protections
enshrined in the Magna Carta and the English Bill of Rights provided protections, especially compared to
other European legal systems at the time. Decisions were expected to be based on justice, decency, and
fairness and applied equally to all. There was a body of common law in place that established precedents
for punishment and sentencing, and the important right of trial by jury was firmly established. This was
the system established in all British colonies.

In addition to these political and legal traditions, English colonists developed a strong commitment to
economic freedom. The most predominant reason behind immigration to the colonies was economic
opportunity. Most settlers could not own land in their home countries because land was scarce and
claimed. Without land, they could not raise their social or political status, nor could they vote because
land ownership was a requirement for voting. This meant that the New World offered economic
opportunities beyond what was possible in Europe. All of the colonists, even those who came for religious
freedom, hoped to own property, reap the benefits of their own labors, and pursue economic success.

Despite the economic opportunities in the colonies, there were challenges that came as part of being in
the colonial system. Most European nations in the New World practiced mercantilism, a system based on
the idea that a nation’s power came from its wealth. Since a nation’s wealth was based upon how much
gold and silver it controlled, the way to create or maintain power was to accumulate more gold and silver
in the national treasury. European nations established colonies as part of a competitive effort to control
the natural resources that could be sold for gold and silver.

English colonists living in British North America were part of this system. Although there was economic
opportunity, colonists were expected to play a role in the larger international economic system that
funneled wealth back to Great Britain and away from France and Spain. In addition, some migrants to the
New World were not free to pursue economic opportunity. Indentured servants were limited, as they

30


were tied to a contract, although many found success when their service was completed. African slaves,
forced into bondage and without hope of freedom, were also a key part of the economic picture, as
slavery was practiced in varying degrees in all thirteen British colonies.

Many colonists enjoyed the freedom to own property and engage in a variety of business enterprises, but
there were several administrative restrictions that ensured wealth would end up in the British treasury.
Joint stock companies, such as the Virginia Company or the British East India Company, were granted the
exclusive right to trade in certain areas for certain goods, creating what we would call today a monopoly
and payment of bribes. For example, the Virginia Company had the right to trade tobacco grown in
America. No other company or individual within the

British Empire could do so. That meant that a tobacco farmer in Virginia or the Carolinas could only sell to
the Virginia Company. In return, the Virginia Company could only trade within the British Empire and paid
a share of the profits to the king to protect its exclusive right. The system made it easy for the
government to regulate trade, and the company benefited from the protection of the British navy. The
relationship between the company and British officials became so intertwined in some instances that it
was difficult to determine where the government ended and the company began.

In addition, from the 1630s to the 1760s, Parliament began passing what were called the Navigation Acts
to regulate the flow and trade and wealth throughout the empire. These regulations were designed to
make sure that all trade remained within the empire and brought wealth into the English treasury. In the
timber industry, for example, colonists cut down trees, sawed them into boards, and sold them to the
appropriate joint stock company, and the boards were shipped to England. Laborers did not receive pay
for their work but instead received a bill of credit from the company. If the woodcutter desired a table or
chair, he could order it from England and pay for the goods with his bill of credit. The added value of the
finished table remained in England, as production of goods was discouraged in the colonies. If a company
found that the best markets for its goods was outside the empire, those trades were allowed if a duty on
those goods was first paid to the British government. These duties were not direct taxes but a part of
mercantilism that ensured the proper flow of trade within the empire and guaranteed that the

British treasury always received a piece of any transaction. Actual industry and production were actively
and often legislatively discouraged, as within the system of mercantilism, the colonies served as sources
of raw materials and markets for goods. Although restrictive, mercantilism worked remarkably well for
many years. The British Empire prospered, and so did many British citizens living in the colonies. Great
Britain was the most powerful empire in the world—and being a part of that system was a benefit to
many as well as a protection in a world of competing powers and imperial claims. The system did not
reward native peoples, however, and closed access to markets to some colonists. Over time, colonists
looked for opportunities or loopholes that allowed them to get around the restrictions. Smuggling

31


became relatively prevalent, and many came to see the restrictions of mercantilism as barriers to
economic opportunity despite the benefits of being part of the British Empire.

However, most colonists in 1763 were pleased with their part in the British economic political, legal, and
economic system, and proud of their heritage and identity. The positive relationship between mother
country and colony had lasted for nearly 150 years. Colonists enjoyed rights and freedoms unmatched in
the world, and were securely part of a powerful and growing empire protected from the encroachment of
other European nations. To understand the forces that broke that connection and pushed the colonists
to break philosophical, psychological, and physical ties with the British Empire and to declare their
independence, we must look at the events of 1763– 1776.

The precipitating cause of these changes was most certainly the results of the French and Indian War
(1756–1763). This war was the culmination of a century-long struggle for control of North America
between England and France, and was part of the Seven Years War, a struggle for power in Europe and
for a world empire. In the American colonies, the issues revolved around religious differences (Catholic
France vs. Protestant England), the right to lands west of the Appalachian Mountains, and the profits to
be gained from the fur trade and fishing. The fighting between the British and the French also involved
alliances with various tribes throughout North America. The struggle began over the control of the rich
Ohio Valley. The French were expanding their presence in the region, and Virginia wanted to protect its
claims on the same territory. A small military
force under a British general and a young
George Washington confronted the French at
Fort Pitt on the western frontier. A battle
ensued, the British lost, and the war began.

The war lasted for seven long years. The
colonial militia fought alongside the British
“redcoats” in this war, and the colonists made a
significant contribution in both blood and
treasure. The British won the war, resulting in a
greatly expanded British empire as the French
were expelled into their territories in Canada
and the British took over the Ohio and
Mississippi River valleys.

However, the war left a staggering debt of 130 million pounds as well as the increased administrative
costs of defending a larger empire. When English merchants and landlords living in England protested the
suggestion of higher taxes, Parliament began looking into other economic measures that would either

32


save or raise money. The first edict, the Proclamation of 1763, prohibited colonists from migrating past
the Appalachian Mountains and claiming land in the Ohio River Valley in an attempt to save
administrative costs. The second measure was the first direct taxes ever levied on the colonies to recoup
some of the war debt, a war fought to protect and defend the British colonies in America.

The prohibition on migration past the Appalachians was troubling for many colonists, as western
settlement had been a hallmark of colonial development. However, most believed that the restriction
would eventually be eased over time. The imposition of direct taxes, however, was another matter. The
taxes impacted every level of society in the colonies. The first in a long line of new taxes was the Sugar Act
(1764), intended to raise revenue through a tighter enforcement of the Navigation Acts. Colonists
organized protests and boycotts of certain British goods, and the enforcement of the act cost the British
government more money than it raised and was repealed by Parliament.

The Stamp Act (1765) was the first attempt to raise money directly through a new internal tax, and was
levied on all printed material—newspapers, pamphlets, almanacs, licenses, and commercial and legal
documents. This was particularly bothersome to the most influential and articulate members of the
colonies, as they were the ones who most often dealt with printed material. Because it was purely a
revenue raising and internal tax, and one that the colonists had not been consulted on, the colonists
reacted with hostility. A group called the Sons of Liberty organized to intimidated royal tax collectors and
government officials. Violence occurred in several colonies, and for the first time, colonists used their
economic power in an organized fashion for political purposes.

It was during the debate over the Stamp Act that Benjamin Franklin, then in London, was asked to come
to the House of Commons to answer questions and help illuminate the colonial perspective. Franklin, the
first international celebrity, was well known for his scientific achievements and his writing in America as
well as in Europe. He was the most famous American, and one of the most respected people in the world.
His “examination” in front of Parliament was later published i n London and reprinted in the colonies. It
provides great insights into the growing rift between the colonies and Great Britain. While Parliament saw
their actions as the legitimate role of empire, acting under the British rule of law, the colonists viewed
these actions quite differently.

Examination of Dr. Benjamin Franklin in the House of Commons, 1766 Question in Parliament

(Q): Do you think it right that America should be protected by this country, and pay no part of the
expense?

Answer by Franklin (A): That is not the case. The Colonies raised, clothed, and paid, during the last war,
near 25,000 men, and spent many million s…

Q: Do not you think the people of America would submit to pay the stamp duty, if it was moderated?

33


A: No, never, unless compelled by force of arms. …

Q: What was the temper of America towards Great-Britain before the year 1763?

A: The best in the world. They submitted willingly to the government of the Crown, and paid, in all their
courts, obedience to acts of Parliament. Numerous as the people are in the several old provinces, they
cost you nothing in forts, citadels, garrisons or armies, to keep them in subjection.

They were governed by this country at the expense only of a little pen, ink and paper. They were led by a
thread. They had not only a respect, but an affection, for Great-Britain, for its laws, its customs and
manners, and even a fondness for its fashions, that greatly increased the commerce. Natives of Britain
were always treated with particular regard; to be an Old England-man was, of itself, a character of some
respect, and gave a kind of rank among us.

Q. And what is their temper now?

A: O, very much altered. …

Q: In what light did the people of America use to consider the Parliament of Great-Britain?

A: They considered the Parliament as the great bulwark and security of their liberties and

privileges, and always spoke of it with the utmost respect and veneration. Arbitrary ministers, they

thought, might possibly, at times, attempt to oppress them; but they relied on it, that the

Parliament, on application, would always give redress. …

Q: And have they not still the same respect for Parliament?

A: No; it is greatly lessened.

Q: To what causes is that owing?

A: To a concurrence of causes; the restraints lately laid on their trade, by which the bringing of foreign
gold and silver into the Colonies was prevented; the prohibition of making paper money among
themselves; and then demanding a new and heavy tax by stamps; taking away, at the same time, trials
by juries, and refusing to receive and hear their humble petitions.

Q: Don’t you think they would submit to the stamp-act, if it was modified, the obnoxious parts taken out,
and the duty reduced to some particulars, of small moment?

A: No; they will never submit to it. …

34


Q: Considering the resolutions of Parliament, as to the right, do you think, if the stamp-act is repealed,
that the North Americans will be satisfied?

A: I believe they will. …

Q: If the act is not repealed, what do you think will be the consequences?

A: A total loss of the respect and affection the people of America bear to this country, and of all the
commerce that depends on tha t respect and affection. …

Q: If the stamp-act should be repealed, would it induce the assemblies of America to acknowledge the
rights of Parliament to tax them, and would they erase their resolutions?

A. No, never.

Q: Is there no means of obliging them to erase those resolutions?

A: None that I know of; they will never do it unless compelled by force of arms.

Q: Is there a power on earth that can force them to erase them?

A: No power, how great soever, can force men to change their opinions.

As a result of the colonial protests, Parliament repealed the Stamp Act but passed the Declaratory Act
that reasserted Parliament’s authority to govern and legislate for the colonies in all cases. The colonial
idea of “taxation without representation” was countered by Parliament’s declaration that the colonies
were “virtually represented” in Parliament and that as subjects of the divinely chosen king, they were
bound to obey. It wasn’t the size of the taxes, or even the taxes themselves, that inspired protest. It was
the idea that this assertion of British power meant increased control and the threat of tyranny. The cycle
of action and reaction continued to drive a wedge between the colonists and their mother country, made
worse by distance, decades of separate development, and the lack of communication and understanding
between them. Conflict between colonists and British soldiers, quartered in Boston to keep the peace
and enforce the various statutes of Parliament, came into violent conflict in 1770 in the so-called Boston
Massacre. A colonial mob approached British soldiers with rocks and snowballs and were fired upon,
killing five colonists. This event became a rallying cry throughout the colonies, and the situation began to
escalate. Parliament continued to pass revenue acts. The Tea Act (1773) granted the East India Company
a virtual monopoly on tea sales and forced the collection of a tax. Rather than pay the tax, a group of
angry colonists organized the Boston Tea Party in December 1773, dumping the tea into Boston Harbor.
In retaliation, the Coercive Acts closed the port of Boston, cracked down on the independence of the
Massachusetts legislature, and outlawed town meetings. In an effort to punish the colony of

35


Massachusetts, the British increased the mounting spirit of resistance and helped unite very different
colonies in a common cause.

The revolution had begun, but for such a drastic change, there had to be a discussion about the meaning
of liberty and freedom. The colonists had to be convinced that separation from the British Empire was
their only option, a dramatic and unprecedented step in the history of the world.

