Week 5 :The Constitution ~
an Inspired Document
“I feel it a duty to express my profound & solemn conviction, derived from my intimate opportunity of 
observing & appreciating the views of the Convention, collectively & individually, that there never was 
an assembly of men, charged with a great & arduous trust, who were more pure in their motives, or 
more exclusively or anxiously devoted to the object committed to them, than were the members of 
the Federal Convention of 1787, to the object of devising and proposing a constitutional system which 
would best supply the defects of that which it was to replace, and best secure the permanent liberty 
and happiness of their country.” 
- James Madison, Notes of Debates in the Federal Convention of 1787 
A Heavenly Banner 
While imprisoned in Liberty Jail, the Prophet Joseph Smith penned a lengthy letter addressed to The Church and signed 
by himself and the other prisoners. In this letter, some of which became Sections 121, 122, and 123 of the Doctrine and 
Covenants, the Prophet described in detail the crimes and atrocities committed against The Church by state and local 
governments. He opened his heart to the struggling saints and shared the doctrines received while inside the walls of his 
prison-temple. At this time of severe persecution, unfair accusations, unjust verdicts, and refusal on the part of 
government to redress wrongs, the Prophet penned these words near the conclusion of the letter: 
“Hence we say, that the Constitution of the United States is a glorious 
standard; it is founded in the wisdom of God. It is a heavenly banner; it is 
to all those who are privileged with the sweets of its liberty, like the cooling 
shades and refreshing waters of a great rock in a thirsty and weary land. It 
is like a great tree under whose branches men from every clime can be 
shielded from the burning rays of the sun…”47
The prophet and his struggling fellow saints, in their position of 
tribulation and need, reached for, yearned for, and, expected the glorious truths and protections 
promised in the United States Constitution, promises they were being denied. In this they echoed the 
cries and desires of other politically repressed groups prior and since, including those referred to in the 


phrase “We the People” who did not enjoy fully the rights promised in the Constitution at the time of its 
ratification. However, because of the lofty ideals expressed in the Constitution, those groups previously 
denied rights can find support and justification in the principles of the Constitution. The United States 
Constitution established the ideal and laid the foundation for success for the country and all of its people.
The American Constitution has weathered many storms and prevented the abuses of power that come 
when power remains unchecked.48 When compared to all other countries across time and space, no 
other nation comes close to offering so much freedom to so many people for so long.
Brief Overview
I. The US Constitution was created to benefit everyone
II. The inspired principles 
III. The role of public virtue in relation to the inspired principles
IV. The threats to the inspired principles
V. Responsibilities as citizens and church members
I. The US Constitution established for the benefit of everyone
Before identifying the inspired principles in the Constitution, we should make sure we are on the same 
page with the definition of a constitution. President Dallin H. Oaks explained it best in his talk “Defending 
Our Divinely Inspired Constitution” when he said a “constitution is the foundation of government. It 
provides structure and limits for the exercise of government powers.”49
This talk was so instructive of the importance of the US Constitution that we will be using it throughout 
this week’s reading (along with another talk President Oaks gave back in 1992 titled “The Divinely Inspired 
Constitution”). Even the title of his talk should provoke the reader to ask, "Does this really apply to 
members of The Church who do not live or who are not from the United States?” 
President Oaks explained why the US Constitution is important to members of The Church living 
anywhere in the world. 
#1 - “God revealed that He ‘established’ it [the US Constitution] ‘ for the rights and protection of all 
flesh’. That is why this constitution is of special concern for The Church of Jesus Christ of Latterday Saints throughout the world.”50


And …
#2 - The US Constitution is known as one of our greatest exports because “it soon became a 
model worldwide. Today, every nation except three have adopted written constitutions.”51
Here is one way to visualize the relationship between God, government and a constitution.
Why did God have a hand in establishing the US Constitution? 
Again, President Oaks explains that the US Constitution allows men and women enough freedom in order 
to exercise their moral agency, “the power to decide and to act” so that we “may be accountable” for our 
own decisions on our day of judgment.52
 This begs the question - “What are the principles in the US 
Constitution that allow people to exercise their God-given right of moral agency?” The answer to this 
question helps members of The Church anywhere in the world protect and/or advocate for good 
governing principles (if they exist in their respective countries).
Here are the Inspired Principles that will be discussed:
I. Popular Sovereignty
II. Federalism (or Division of Powers)
III. Separation of Powers
IV. A Written Bill of Rights (the first 10 Amendments)
V. Rule of Law 


It is important to note that “our belief that the United States Constitution was divinely inspired does not 
mean that divine revelation dictated every word and phrase, such as the provisions allocating the number 
of representatives from each state or the minimum age of each.”53
II. The Inspired Principles
A. POPULAR SOVEREIGNTY
Here is how President Oaks explained this inspired principle -
First is the principle that the source of government power is the people. In a time when sovereign 
power was universally assumed to come from the divine right of kings or from military power, 
attributing sovereign power to the people was revolutionary. Philosophers had advocated this, 
but the United States Constitution was the first to apply it. Sovereign power in the people does 
not mean that mobs or other groups of people can intervene to intimidate or force government 
action. The Constitution established a constitutional democratic republic, where the people 
exercise their power through their elected representatives.
Popular sovereignty means that the people are the source of political power. We see this recognition in 
the Constitution’s opening line, “We the People.” In other words, the people delegate, or authorize, the 
government to use the people’s political power to protect their rights, which will allow for the common 
benefit and safety of the people. 
This idea, that political power comes from the 
people and not kings, also implies “popular 
responsibility. 
Instead of blaming their troubles on a king or 
other sovereign, all citizens must share the 
burdens and responsibilities of governing.”54
Why is it important for people to be 
accountable?
God created us to be our own agents—to act 
and not be acted upon. “The most desirable 
condition for the effective exercise of God-given moral agency is a condition of maximum freedom and 


responsibility. In this condition [popular sovereignty] men are accountable for their own sins and cannot 
blame their political conditions on their bondage to a king or a tyrant.”55
After the chaotic events of Shays’ Rebellion, the Founders wondered and doubted if the people could 
handle a government that required “popular responsibility”. Overall, the American people wanted a 
democratic and republican form of government. Therefore, the Founders were inspired to find a way to 
make it work, and the balancing act began. 
The balancing act requires daily effort that cannot be taken for granted. Popular sovereignty is not like a 
checklist that was completed when the Constitution was ratified. The people continue to be the 
appropriate source of political power and the other inspired principles below can help protect that 
political power through continued support and advocacy.
B. FEDERALISM (OR DIVISION OF POWERS)
President Oaks explained -
A second inspired principle is the division of delegated power between the nation and its subsidiary 
states. In our federal system, this unprecedented principle has sometimes been altered by inspired 
amendments, such as those abolishing slavery and extending voting rights to women, mentioned earlier. 
Significantly, the United States Constitution limits the national government to the exercise of powers 


granted expressly or by implication, and it reserves all other government powers “to the States 
respectively, or to the people.”56
Federalism, or division of power, “means that through the Constitution, the people delegate (or 
authorize) some of their political power to 
the national government and some political 
power to the state government.” This 
creates some natural tension between the 
national and state governments over which 
entity has correct power to govern in 
certain areas. Before we go on, you might 
be asking yourself - “why is this so 
revolutionary?” This division of power was 
revolutionary because it had never been 
done before and many believed it was 
physically possible. 
Federalism has been around for over 200 years so the concept is inherent in our minds. However, to the 
Founders, sovereignty was like a person’s soul.57
 A person has one soul which physically cannot be 
divided into two souls.58
 Your soul can have different responsibilities like splitting responsibilities into 3 
separate branches - legislative, executive and judicial. In contrast, the soul cannot function if it is split 
into two different entities because that would destroy the existence of the soul. It was unthinkable that 
sovereignty could be split into two competing government entities - federal and state. However, the 
Founders’ experience under the Articles of Confederation made them rethink this theory. The Founders 
reasoned that they had been living in a pseudo-federalist state while under King George III and their own 
local governing bodies. This experience showed them it could work, but there would still be constant 
tension between two governmental powers. 
President Oaks explained that any powers not expressly given in the US Constitution are reserved for the 
state. Over the years, amendments to the Constitution have been added to expressly give the federal 
government certain powers that the states have either abused or incorrectly applied. The two listed 
examples of this in President Oaks’ talk was slavery and women’s right to vote. The reverse is also true. 


The federal government has taken more power that rightfully belongs to the states, like laws governing 
marriage, but this is the natural tension between two governmental powers. The following graphic gives 
a list of some of the independent and shared powers.
C. SEPARATION OF POWERS
From President Oaks -
Another inspired principle is the separation of powers. Well over a century before our 1787 
Constitutional Convention, the English Parliament pioneered the separation of legislative and executive 
authority when they wrested certain powers from the king. The inspiration in the American convention 
was to delegate independent executive, legislative, and judicial powers so these three branches could 
exercise checks upon one another.
Lord Acton, a 19th century English politician, is famously known for saying “absolute power corrupts 
absolutely.” In order for our power to govern (popular sovereignty) to be protected from corruption, the 
Founders divided and separated it so it was scattered across several institutions, or decentralized, 
meaning there is not one central location holding or possessing everything. We just finished discussing 
how the US Constitution divided our sovereignty between two separate government entities (federal and 
state). The Constitution takes our power to govern within the federal government and separates it even 
more into 3 branches, with powers given to each branch to check each other. This separating and 
checking is meant to prevent power from centralizing, which is the corrupting influence. 
92

Here is a brief timeline of influential stepping stones towards our system created in the Constitution -
1688 - “The idea of separation of powers was at least a century old. The English Parliament 
achieved an initial separation of legislative and executive authority when they wrested certain 
powers from the king in the revolution of 1688.”59
1748 - The political philosophy of the French writer Montesquieu in The Spirit of the Laws (1748) 
was particularly influential for those in attendance at the convention. Montesquieu argued that 
“when the legislative and executive powers are united in the same person, or in the same body of 
magistrates, there can be no liberty. … Again, there can be no liberty, if the judiciary power be not 
separated from the legislative and executive.” Although England believed in a separation of 
powers in principle, “the British constitution provided for separation of personnel, rather than for 
division of function, and even that principle had come to be largely disregarded in practice.”60
1776 - After declaring independence, each of the colonies created their own state republics which 
incorporated the doctrine of separation of powers. The "doctrine was reflected in all the 
Revolutionary state constitutions and explicitly endorsed in six of them.”61 Here is one example 
with the Massachusetts Constitution of 1778 -
“The legislative department shall never 
exercise the executive and judicial 
powers, or either of them: the executive 
shall never exercise the legislative and 
judicial powers, or either of them: the 
judicial shall never exercise the 
legislative and executive powers, or 
either of them: to the end it may be a 
government of laws and not of men.”62
It is clear that “the idea of separation of powers 
came long before the U.S. Constitutional 
Convention.”63
 However, the inspiration came 


during the convention as “the delegates found just the right combination to assure the integrity of each 
branch, appropriately checked and balanced with the others.”64
 This “right combination” is so important 
to keep these 3 branches separate to each other that one supreme court justice explained -
“Without a secure structure of separated powers, our Bill of Rights would be worthless, as are the bill of 
rights of many nations of the world that have adopted, or even improved upon, the mere words of 
ours.”65
However, despite the inspired creation of a government with separation of powers, there needed to be 
additional restraints against the problem of democratic tyranny in the new republic. James Madison, 
understanding human nature and the quest for power, wrote that “ambition must be made to counteract 
ambition…[thus] supplying by opposite and rival interests the defect of better motives.”66
In other words, each branch would have some sole function or responsibility that would “check in” on the 
other branches to make sure power does not centralize, and this function also allows for that balancing 
of ambition and power. For example, the executive branch has the sole function to veto a legislative bill. 
Therefore, the judicial branch has no authority to veto a legislative bill, but the judicial branch does have 
sole authority to declare a law constitutional if it comes before the court. The following graphic shows 
the other checks and balances created by the Constitution.
D. A WRITTEN BILL OF RIGHTS (THE FIRST 10 AMENDMENTS)
From Elder Oaks -
A fourth inspired principle is in the cluster of vital guarantees of individual rights and specific limits on 
government authority in the Bill of Rights, adopted by amendment just three years after the Constitution 
went into force. A Bill of Rights was not new. Here the inspiration was in the practical implementation of 
principles pioneered in England, beginning with the Magna Carta. The writers of the Constitution were 
familiar with these because some of the colonial charters had such guarantees.
A written bill of rights was not included in the original text of the US Constitution. It became a rallying cry 
during the ratification process. This is when the delegates went home to try and persuade the people of 
their respective colonies to vote in favor of the US Constitution. Some colonies did not want a written bill 
of rights for reasons explained by James Wilson, former supreme court justice, who “said in the 


Pennsylvania 
ratifying 
convention that 
itemizing the rights 
would be 
dangerous; no one 
could list all human 
rights, and the 
failure to include 
some could be 
used as an excuse 
to violate them.”67
 
It is human nature 
to see a list and 
assume it is 
exhaustive, or 
complete. 
Therefore, if a right 
or law is not found 
on the list then it 
might be assumed that a person does not have that right or power. President Gordon B. Hinckley spoke 
to this very idea in a Priesthood session concerning illicit drugs. He said -
“Some have even used as an alibi the fact that drugs are not mentioned in the Word of Wisdom. What a 
miserable excuse. There is likewise no mention of the hazards of diving into an empty swimming pool or 
of jumping from an overpass onto the freeway. But who doubts the deadly consequences of such?”68
Despite compelling arguments against a written list of “do nots”, James Madison promised religious 
minorities in his Virginia constituency (as a member of Congress) that he would bring an amendment for 
a written bill of rights if they supported the ratification of the Constitution.69
 On June 8, 1789, Madison 
proposed to the House to consider the subject of amendments to the Constitution. This action was met 
with resistance, but Madison worked to get a coalition to make this happen. The first 10 Amendments, 

the Bill of Rights, were ratified by the close of 1791, which was three years after the US Constitution was 
ratified in 1787. 
President Oaks explains the importance of 
these written bill of rights -
Without a Bill of Rights, America could 
not have served as the host nation for 
the Restoration of the gospel, which 
began just three decades later. There 
was divine inspiration in the original 
provision that there should be no 
religious test for public office,70 but the 
addition of the religious freedom and 
antiestablishment guarantees in the 
First Amendment was vital. We also see 
divine inspiration in the First 
Amendment’s freedoms of speech and press and in the personal protections in other amendments, such 
as for criminal prosecutions.
One example of the importance of freedom of speech comes from our Savior, who was punished under 
an anti-free speech crime of sedition, or speech that threatens the form of government.71
 The Jews first 
tried our Savior under the crime of blasphemy, which is also an anti-free speech crime, but “no Jewish 
tribunal had authority to inflict the death penalty; imperial Rome had reserved this prerogative as her 
own.”72
 The Romans did not have a blasphemy crime, but they did have corporate punishment for 
sedition.73
 Ultimately, the Savior gave up His own life, but His legal crime was that of thinking differently. 
This is just one example why a written bill of rights is so vital to every human being and the restoration of 
the gospel of Jesus Christ.


E. RULE OF LAW AND NOT RULE OF MEN
President Oaks said -
Fifth and finally, I see divine inspiration in the vital 
purpose of the entire Constitution. We are to be 
governed by law and not by individuals, and our 
loyalty is to the Constitution and its principles and 
processes, not to any office holder. In this way, all 
persons are to be equal before the law. These 
principles block the autocratic ambitions that have 
corrupted democracy in some countries. They also 
mean that none of the three branches of government 
should be dominant over the others or prevent the 
others from performing their proper constitutional 
functions to check one another.
As discussed in Week 2, the Rule of Law “means that stable, impartial laws rule over society rather than 
anyone’s will.”74
 President Oaks explains three main ideas that build on each other and make the entire 
Constitution divinely inspired -
1. The rule of law prevents the rule of tyranny or capriciousness.
2. The separation of powers help uphold the rule of law.
3. Checks and balances help separation of powers stay separate.
The Preamble of the Constitution explains that the goal is to create a society that is peaceful, prosperous 
and just. The rule of law allows for these outcomes to exist which creates unlimited amounts of potential. 
We explored the rule of law in detail in Week 3, but it never hurts to briefly repeat the 3 main 
characteristics for the rule of law to exist. They are - 
1. Everyone is equal under the law or the law applies to everyone.
2. People and/or their claims will be judged by an independent judiciary.
3. People must have access to the laws.
The US Constitution was written to protect the sovereign power of all the people living under it. That was 
the ideal and hope of the founders.75
 However, we learned in Week 4 that there were compromises 
made in the development process in order to secure the votes of all the states to try and form a more 


perfect union. Despite this, people like Martin Luther King, Jr. understood the meaning and significance 
of equality under the law created in the Constitution when he said in his iconic “I Have a Dream” speech -
“When the architects of our republic wrote the magnificent words of the Constitution and the 
Declaration of Independence, they were signing a promissory note to which every American was to fall 
heir. This note was a promise that all men - yes, black men as well as white men - would be guaranteed 
the unalienable rights of life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.”76
The Constitution does not promise equality, but it promises everyone a system to try and prevent 
unequal treatment by the government or compensate for damages done. What happens when we suffer 
injustice? President Oaks explains that “our loyalty is to the Constitution and its principles and 
processes.” Therefore, we follow the laws and use the proper channels to seek redress for any wrongs 
we believe we might have suffered. One example is the incarceration of Joseph Smith in Liberty Jail, 
mentioned at the beginning of this reading. He wrote a letter to Edward Partridge asking him to go 
before the Missouri state legislature to reassure the people of Missouri that the Saints were friends and 
not enemies. Edward Partridge said in part -
“In laying our case before your honorable body, we say that we are willing, and ever have been, to 
conform to the Constitution and laws of the United States and of this State. We ask in common with 
others the protection of the laws. We ask for the privilege guaranteed to all free citizens of the United 
States and of this State to be extended to us, that we may be permitted to settle and live where we 
please, and worship God according to the dictates of our conscience without molestation. And while we 
ask for ourselves this privilege, we are willing all others should enjoy the same.”77
We know Joseph Smith and the Saints continued to suffer injustices without protection or redress by the 
law of the Constitution. However, Joseph Smith and the early Saints did show us the way to try and 
create peace is by following the laws of the Constitution. This is an example of displaying public virtue. 
We now turn to why public virtue matters so much.
III. The Role of Public Virtue in Relation to the Inspired Principles
We began this week’s readings discussing the fact that the transcendent importance of moral agency is 
why the Lord established the Constitution for all mankind in the first place. Interconnected with this is the 
truth that the Constitution cannot function properly if the people do not use their moral agency for good. 
In 1798, John Adams, one of the Founders and future president of the United States, said,


“Our Constitution was made only for a moral and religious People. It is wholly inadequate to the 
government of any other.”78
George Washington agreed, asserting, 
“It is substantially true that virtue and morality are a necessary [foundation] of popular government.”79
Even with all its divine principles in place, without virtue and morality in the people, the Constitution is 
threatened. Indeed, the fact that the people are sovereign according to the Constitution makes this fact 
obvious. If those who hold the power (the people) are not filled with truth and light, the system cannot 
function as it should.
Additionally, it is a foundational principle that the primary check on government was to be the wise and 
virtuous actions of its citizens. Public virtue is key in this scenario. 
The word “virtue” has had differing connotations throughout history, but for our purposes, we can think
of virtue as: behavior showing high moral standards. Therefore, public virtue is high moral standards in 
public behavior. A citizenry that embodies public virtue is willing to:
● commit to the rule of law
● use exercised, reasoned self-restraint, compassion, and decency
● serve in public office
● set aside private interests for the good of society 
● compromise politically
● practice individual as well as public virtue
James Madison, explained in Federalist 5180, one of the most famous of the Federalist Papers81 (please 
see diagram 1 at the end of the reading for more information), that if people always acted with perfect 
public virtue, no government would be needed. But since people aren’t always angels, it is important to 
have systems in place to check the power of the different parts of government. This is the idea behind the 
system of checks and balances described above. It might be easier to understand Madison’s powerful 
argument with a modern day translation next to his passages.


The Founders recognized from the beginning that it was unrealistic to expect people to always be 
virtuous. Therefore, they developed a system of auxiliary precautions to counteract the inevitabilities of 
human nature. These are big words that simply mean structure in the government that makes it more 
difficult for power to become concentrated in any one group's hands. An article written in BYU Studies 
Quarterly sheds more light on this definition -
“The structure of government, the separation of powers and checks and balances, the scheme of 
representation - all were auxiliary to the primary protection against the excesses of governmental 
power.”82
One way to visualize this would be through the analogy often used to explain the vital role the Book of 
Mormon plays in the foundation of the Gospel of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. It is often referred to 


as the “keystone” of our religion. Public virtue, likewise, is the keystone to good government (see 
Diagram 2 at the bottom). No matter how well structured government is on paper, there is not enough 
police power to restrain the people if the people decline in virtue. (We will see this next week when we 
discuss the Civil War.) As James Madison emphasized, 
“Is there no virtue among us? If there be not, we are in a wretched situation. No theoretical checks—no 
form of government—can render it secure. To 
suppose that any form of government will secure 
liberty or happiness without any virtue in the 
people, is a chimerical idea.”83
The Book of Mormon repeatedly expresses a related 
idea.
“Inasmuch as ye shall keep my commandments ye shall prosper in the land; and inasmuch as ye will not 
keep my commandments ye shall be cut off from my presence.”84
Virtue in society, according to the Founders, is connected to religion in society. President George 
Washington said, 
“Let us with caution indulge the supposition that morality can be maintained without religion.”85
We will address the importance of religion and religious freedom in a democratic republic in a later 
lesson.
Ideally, citizens filled with public virtue will function fairly and justly within the government created by our 
divinely inspired Constitution. However, the fact is that humans are not perfect, we all have our moral 
agency, and problems inevitably arise.
IV. Threats to the Inspired Principles
When he was elected president of the United States, Abraham Lincoln faced the staggering challenge of a 
nation on the brink of rupture. President Lincoln reasoned that according to universal law and the 
Constitution of the United States, it was not legal for a state to secede from the United States. In his First 
Inaugural Address, he said, 


“I therefore consider that, in view of the Constitution and the laws, the Union 
is unbroken; and, to the extent of my ability, I shall take care, as the 
Constitution itself expressly enjoins upon me, that the laws of the Union be 
faithfully executed in all States.”86
President Lincoln, armed with an unfailing determination to be guided by the 
Constitution, successfully navigated the country through the crisis of the Civil 
War. 
It is important to recognize that although the Constitution laid out a plan for a 
successful structure of government, inevitably questions, problems, and even 
occasional constitutional crises such as the Civil War have arisen in our nation’s history. As President 
Oaks explained, 
“Despite the divinely inspired principles of the United States Constitution, when exercised by imperfect 
mortals their intended effects have not always been achieved.”87
This helps us appreciate why it is that in a country with a divinely inspired Constitution, problems and 
significant injustices have marred the pages of our history. History marches on and we find ourselves 
with our own threats to our divinely inspired Constitution in our current day.
Current Threats 
In his 2021 Conference address, President Oaks listed several threats to the divinely inspired principles of 
the Constitution. These are current, applicable issues that we encounter in our day and they deserve our 
attention and concern.
1. First is an example of a threat to the inspired principle of federalism. President Oaks said - 
“Important subjects of lawmaking, such as some laws governing family relationships, have been 
taken from the states by the federal government.”88
Originally, the United States Constitution was written to limit the power of the federal (national) 
government, allowing states to retain a high degree of power and autonomy. One main reason for 
this is the idea that the states are closer to the people and have a better idea of how to help their 
own people. Also, it is easier to hold state and local politicians accountable for laws that directly 


affect the people in everyday life. Like countries, different states have different interests. For 
example, Idaho is known for their potatoes while Texas is known for oil. The people in Idaho 
naturally have different economic interests than the people of Texas. These powers over the 
public’s health and physical safety that the states “retain,” or keep, are collectively known as the 
“police powers.” Therefore, state governments have the power to make laws and public policy 
concerning -
● Social policies
● Welfare programs
● Education
● Police organizations
● Land zoning laws
● Business regulations
Over time, power has incrementally been transferred from the states to the federal government. 
Two examples of social policies that were a transfer of power are two recent Supreme Court 
decisions. In 1973 the Supreme Court ruled in Roe v. Wade that the right to an abortion was a 
federal issue, not a state issue. Similarly, in the 2015 Obergefell v. Hodges case, the Supreme 
Court ruled that the federal government, not the state governments, could decide whether 
homosexual marriage was legal. These are examples of issues being taken away from the states 
and given to the federal government. 
Although there are many other examples of this in our nation’s history, President Oaks specifically 
mentions laws governing family relationships. Issues involving the family are of particular concern 
to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints due to The Church’s belief in the preeminent 
importance of the family.
2. Second, President Oaks explained that, 
“The First Amendment guarantee of free speech has sometimes been diluted by suppression of 
unpopular speech.”89
As discussed above, the Founders knew that for a republic to function well, there must be a free 
and unfettered exchange of ideas and plenty of opportunities for healthy debate. “The Founders 
also understood that free speech is more than just part of the natural right to liberty; it is an 
important check to keep government power limited and accountable. …The power to criticize the 


government is key to preventing tyranny and the First 
Amendment ensures that citizens retain this right.”90
We also know that true ideas are not always popular. This 
means that for truth to prevail, there must be opportunities 
for even minority groups to speak and be heard. Some 
examples given above with Joseph Smith and our Savior 
show the dangers in punishing someone for what they say. 
This is an example of a threat to the Bill of Rights.
3. The third threat mentioned by President Oaks concerns the 
separation of powers and checks and balances -
“The principle of separation of powers has always been under pressure with the ebb and flow of 
one branch of government exercising or inhibiting the powers delegated to another.”91
A good example of this is the use of executive orders by the President which can have the effect of 
writing new laws. In general, executive orders (EO) can be a necessary function of the Presidency 
in order to “execute” the laws that Congress passes. Let’s look at one example in the following 
graph about the “Secure Fence Act”.


However, presidents have made generous use of EOs that have had the effect of creating new 
laws or going beyond what the law allows. This is what President Oaks was referring to when he 
said “one branch of government exercising… the powers delegated to another.” This type of 
action can prevent the necessary checks on our powers that will create an imbalance leaving 
minority groups vulnerable. Here is one example.
We will be discussing EO 9066 more in week 10, but the decision in Korematsu v. United States 
(1944) underscores another important point that President Oaks made in his talk when he said -
“[W]e do not see inspiration in every Supreme Court decision interpreting the Constitution.”92
 It 


was not until 2018 when the Supreme Court once and for all explicitly repudiated the decision in 
Korematsu. Chief Justice John Roberts explained -
“The forcible relocation of U.S. citizens to concentration camps, solely and explicitly on the basis 
of race, is objectively unlawful and outside the scope of Presidential authority.”93
The judicial branch was able to serve as a “check” on the executive branch in Trump v. Hawaii, but 
this check to restore balance occurred 74 years after Korematsu. This is one example of why 
separation really does protect our sovereign powers, especially the most vulnerable. 
4. President Oaks further explained,
“There are other threats that undermine the inspired principles of the United States Constitution. 
The stature of the Constitution is diminished by efforts to substitute current societal trends as the 
reason for its founding, instead of liberty and self-government.”94
This is one reason why it is important to study the principles we are discussing in this class. As we 
study the basis of liberty and self-government created through the Constitution, we are better 
able to put current societal trends into perspective. It has become popular to look back on history 
and write a narrative based on how we understand terms and principles today. However, L.P. 
Hartley explained it best when he said, “The past is a foreign country. They do things differently 
there.”95
 As we travel in the past, we learn that -
“the Founders sought only liberty, not equality or fraternity. They aimed to make a political 
revolution, not a social or economic one” and “…their Lockean social-contract political 
philosophy taught them that the preservation of individual liberty was the goal of politics.”96
5. Finally, President Oaks warns against ignoring the divine principles in the Constitution. He said, 
“The authority of the Constitution is trivialized when candidates or officials ignore its principles. 
The dignity and force of the Constitution is reduced by those who refer to it like a loyalty test or a 
political slogan, instead of its lofty status as a source of authorization for and limits on 
government authority.”97


This is a powerful reminder that the Constitution truly has a lofty status and is the source of 
authority for the United States of America and should be regarded as such. The Constitution is 
not to be used as a wedge issue (an issue meant to divide and never to be solved). Some 
examples of wedge issues are gun rights, abortion, healthcare, medicare, free speech, religion, etc. 
Although wedge issues are politically popular, the Constitution is an inspired framework intended 
to protect our God-given natural rights.
As we recognize the threats facing the inspired principles of our Constitution, many of us are 
eager to find solutions and correct wrongs. But sometimes this feels very out of our reach. What 
can we do as citizens of our respective countries to ameliorate the problems threatening effective 
functioning of government? 
V. RESPONSIBILITIES AS CITIZENS AND CHURCH MEMBERS
President Oaks ended his 2021 Conference address with a list of specific responsibilities and duties of 
Latter-day Saints around the world. These are exciting opportunities—action items—that will allow us to 
make a difference in our communities and help prepare the world for things to come. Here are the full 
closing remarks of President Oaks’ talk:
“Our belief in divine inspiration gives Latter-day Saints a unique responsibility to uphold and defend the 
United States Constitution and principles of constitutionalism wherever we live. We should trust in the 
Lord and be positive about this nation’s future.
“What else are faithful Latter-day Saints to do? We must pray for the Lord to guide and bless all nations 
and their leaders. This is part of our article of faith. Being subject to presidents or rulers of course poses 
no obstacle to our opposing individual laws or policies. It does require that we exercise our influence 
civilly and peacefully within the framework of our constitutions and applicable laws. On contested 
issues, we should seek to moderate and unify.
“There are other duties that are part of upholding the inspired Constitution. We should learn and 
advocate the inspired principles of the Constitution. We should seek out and support wise and good 
persons who will support those principles in their public actions. We should be knowledgeable citizens 
who are active in making our influence felt in civic affairs.
“In the United States and in other democracies, political influence is exercised by running for office 
(which we encourage), by voting, by financial support, by membership and service in political parties, 
107

and by ongoing communications to officials, parties, and candidates. To function well, a democracy 
needs all of these, but a conscientious citizen does not need to provide all of them.
“There are many political issues, and no party, platform, or individual candidate can satisfy all personal 
preferences. Each citizen must therefore decide which issues are most important to him or her at any 
particular time. Then members should seek inspiration on how to exercise their influence according to 
their individual priorities. This process will not be easy. It may require changing party support or 
candidate choices, even from election to election.
“Such independent actions will sometimes require voters to support candidates or political parties or 
platforms whose other positions they cannot approve.9
That is one reason we encourage our members 
to refrain from judging one another in political matters. We should never assert that a faithful Latterday Saint cannot belong to a particular party or vote for a particular candidate. We teach correct 
principles and leave our members to choose how to prioritize and apply those principles on the issues 
presented from time to time. We also insist, and we ask our local leaders to insist, that political choices 
and affiliations not be the subject of teachings or advocacy in any of our Church meetings.
“The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints will, of course, exercise its right to endorse or oppose 
specific legislative proposals that we believe will impact the free exercise of religion or the essential 
interests of Church organizations.
“I testify of the divinely inspired Constitution of the United States and pray that we who recognize the 
Divine Being who inspired it will always uphold and defend its great principles. In the name of Jesus 
Christ, amen.”98
Summary
The United States Constitution is a divinely inspired document, created for the protection of the rights of 
all humanity, and used as a guide for constitutions worldwide. The Constitution contains at least five 
inspired principles that are key to allowing individuals to exercise moral agency: popular sovereignty, 
federalism (division of powers), separation of powers, a written Bill of Rights, and the rule of law. These 
principles have always been and continue to be subject to threats. Members of The Church have a unique 
responsibility to defend and uphold the divinely inspired Constitution