Week4- Constitutional Development
“I confess that there are several parts of the Constitution which I do not at present approve, but I am not sure I
shall never approve them. For, having lived long, I have experienced many
instances of being obliged, by better information or fuller consideration, to change
opinions, even on important subjects, which I once thought right, but found to be
otherwise. It is therefore that, the older I grow, the more apt I am to doubt my own
judgment, and to pay more respect to the judgment of others… In these
sentiments, sir, I agree to this Constitution, with all its faults, if they are such;
because I think a general government necessary for us.”
1
- Benjamin Franklin
“Wrong road”
The American people constructed their respective state governments from their theory that smaller was better
and a non-existent central government was best. Quickly, reality proved that some of their theories were based
on flawed assumptions that could only be corrected by creating exactly what they fought against - a federal
government. Benjamin Rush, a signer of the Declaration of Independence and a civic leader in Philadelphia,
made an argument for a stronger national government by explaining:
“We had just emerged from a corrupted monarchy. Although we understood perfectly the principles of
liberty, yet most of us were ignorant of the forms and combinations of power in republics.”
2
It might be tempting to see this time period as a disastrous mistake. However, Elder Jeffrey R. Holland’s story
about a “wrong road” might be a better way to look at this experience. Elder Holland and his son were visiting
the Grand Canyon on an outing together many years ago. By the time they started back home, it was dusk and
getting lost in the dark became a dangerous
possibility. They came to a fork in the road and both
Elder Holland and his son felt impressed to take the
road on the left after praying about the decision.
They drove a couple of hundred yards and quickly
found it was a dead end. Elder Holland turned
around, went back to the fork in the road and took
the road on the right. His son, feeling a little
confused, asked Elder Holland a sincere question
about why they had a strong impression to go down
the wrong road. Elder Holland replied:

1
Jonathan Elliott, ed., The Debates in the Several State Conventions on the Adoption of the Federal Constitution Held at Philadelphia, in
1787; with a Diary of the Debates of the Congress of the Confederation; as Reported by James Madison, a Member, and Deputy from
Virginia 5 (Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott, 1876).
1
“The Lord has taught us an important lesson today. Because we were prompted to take the road to the
left, we quickly discovered which one was the right one … [so we could turn around, and we could feel]
perfectly confident we were headed in the right direction.”
3
The colonists were not prepared to accept a stronger national government at the time of their declaration of
independence. Like in Elder Holland’s experience, maybe the American people needed to go down the “wrong
road” by implementing the Articles of Confederation for a while in order to accept that a written constitution
would have a more stabilizing influence between the states and more effectively secure the rights outlined in the
Declaration of Independence.
A Brief Overview
I. Timeline of Events
II. Revolution + Republics + Articles = Anarchy?
III. Convention or Bust!
IV. The Great Debates and Compromises
V. The Miracle at Philadelphia
VI. The Battle for Ratification
I. Timeline of Events
Sometimes, seeing events in a linear timeline helps to put these issues into context. Context can help us see
how tensions began to form and build over time. We will not have time to discuss each of these events in depth
nor can all the pivotal events that led to the formation of the U.S. Constitution fit in one page. However, it does
help to see how history does not move as fast as our ability to turn pages while reading a book. For example, the
first act of aggression from England that prompted the formation of a Continental Congress happened in
September of 1774, but the formal declaration of independence did not occur until July of 1776.
3 Matthew Holland, “Wrong Roads and Revelation”, Ensign, July 2005.
2
3
II. Revolution + Republics + Articles = Anarchy?
A. Revolution (1775 -1783)
From the timeline above, we see that the American Revolutionary War started before the American
Colonists formally declared independence or the Articles of Confederation were written and ratified by
the states. George Washington had the difficult task of persuading men to serve in the Continental
4
Army because of monumental challenges in their path. Here is a list of some of their biggest issues they
were facing besides enemy combatants:
#1 - Money - payment -
Worthless money: The Continental Congress printed Continental money, but people would not
accept it as it was worthless. As officers tried to feed their soldiers, they complained, “the
farmers would not sell and the millers would not grind for Continental money.”
5
Bankruptcy concerns: Those leaders trying to find ways to finance the war worried that the
depreciation of the Continental money would make it impossible for them to continue on with
the war. “Even a Failure cannot be more fatal than to remain in our present situation. In short
some enter-prize must be undertaken in our present Circumstances or we must give up the
cause.”
6
This caused General Washington to act quickly in an effort to shorten the duration of the war.
#2 - Disease - Smallpox -
Death by disease not war: A quote by John Adams perfectly explains the devastating effect the
communicable disease, smallpox, had on the Continental Army. “Our misfortunes in Canada are
enough to melt the heart of a stone. The smallpox,” mourned John Adams, “is ten times more
terrible than Britons, Canadians and Indians, together.”
7
Inoculate or quarantine: The British soldiers were more immune as a whole because of the
presence the disease already had in their country. However, it was not as prevalent on the
American continent so it had the effect of killing 1 in every 3 people who contracted the disease.
George Washington made the difficult decision to inoculate
8 his soldiers to prevent a bigger
more deadly outbreak and then those soldiers would have immunity. In many cases, they would
inoculate soldiers by picking the scabs of those soldiers who had recently died from smallpox in
order to expose themselves to the live organism. It was a success, with less than 1% of soldiers
dying from the process.

#3 - Supplies - food, clothes, etc. -
No surplus to donate: “The household economy of early America was incapable of supplying
Continental troops with clothing and shoes. …one ‘peaceable man’ watched American troops
march by and observed ‘if the War is continued thro the Winter, the British troops will be scared
at the sight of our Men, for as they had never fought with Naked Men.”
9
“The story of supply in the Continental army is a drab subject, much neglected in most histories
of these events, but it had a drama of its own. The American Revolution was yet another
instance of Rommel’s Law that battles are won or lost by the quartermasters
10 before the first
shot is fired.”
11
Each one of these three examples could have caused the American colonists to lose their war for
independence.
B. The New State Republics (1776-1787)
Immediately following the Declaration of Independence, each of the thirteen original colonies decided to
write state constitutions outlining a new form of government that would replace their colonial charters.
Each of the states were to become a small republic based on democratic and republican principles so
that the rights of the people would be protected. The forms of these governments were true to the
spirit of the Revolution with most of the power vested in a legislative branch ideally designed to be the
place where virtuous representatives made laws based on the virtuous will of the people. Fortunately,
“all of the constitution makers acknowledged the almost sacred nature of writing constitutions and
sharply differentiated that process from that of merely passing legislation.”
12 Unfortunately, in many
cases state constitutions failed to provide the peace and tranquility for which the people had hoped, as
the individual legislatures of the various states were ill-prepared for government and were ripe for
corruption and mismanagement.
George Washington described the widespread problem thusly,
“The inefficiency of state governments indicates we have errors to correct.”
13
James Wilson, another founder and signer of the Declaration feared that in the states,
“The legislature is swallowing up all the other powers.”
14
James Madison called the atmosphere in many of the state legislatures as undependable and difficult to
enforce. He said,

“Revised laws have been altered, re-altered, made better, made worse; and kept in such a
fluctuating position, that persons in civil commission scarce know what is law… [This is] the
grievance complained of in all our republics.”
15
The colonists wanted to restore balance to their lives through their new state republics. Instead, they
found themselves on a pendulum that had swung from one end, tyranny, or oppressive rule under King
George III, to the other end, anarchy, with a lack of a strong central government and no effective rule of
law. This atmosphere of anarchy developed because majority factions in the strong state legislatures
dominated with no executive branch to either check the power of the legislatures or enforce state laws.
(see graphic below)
C. Articles and Anarchy (1781-1787)
The Articles of Confederation created the first post-independence national government. Its problems were
legion. The table included below gives a brief explanation of the weaknesses created by the Articles and the
outcomes of those weaknesses. We will not be able to discuss all of these weaknesses, but we will address three
main problems that were apparent from the beginning.

#1 - One branch of government:
First, the Articles of Confederation had just one branch of
government - a legislature to make laws, but no executive
or judiciary to carry out or apply them. Furthermore, the
legislature poorly represented the people. Each of the 13
states had just one vote despite population differences.
To give you an idea of the population differences, the
chart on the right comes from a 1909 report by the U.S.
Department of Commerce and Labor.
16
In 1780, Virginia
had a population of 520,000 versus Delaware with only
37,000 people. It is understandable why the larger
populated states, like Virginia, really did not think this
was a fair arrangement.
#2 - No power to raise money
Second, under the Articles of Confederation, the
government had no way to raise money. In general,
governments obtain funds in three ways: taxing,

borrowing, or printing. The Articles of Confederation empowered the government to do none of these.
We read in the section above that this was an obstacle for the Continental Congress as they tried to find
ways to fund the army during the American Revolution. Since Americans at the time were extremely
fearful of taxation given their past experiences, only the states had the power to tax. The central
government had no credit because foreign countries were wary of lending money to a country that had
no way to pay back those debts. In addition, there was no uniform national currency, leaving states to
print and coin their own money. If Congress wanted money they had to beg for it from the states and the
states rarely obliged. Since all government action requires money, the Congress was powerless to act in
any meaningful way.
#3 - No authority to negotiate
Third, the country didn’t have a foreign policy because it had no authority. Authority comes from a police
force, the ability to raise money, and have the final word in disputes. The Articles did not give this
authority to the Congress, but each state had its own foreign relations and trade agreements. The army
they had cobbled together during the Revolution had dissolved once the war ended and, as the founding
generation was fearful of a standing army, there was no military to speak of which rendered their
treaties toothless.
17 States were engaging in trade wars by slapping tariffs and trade restrictions on other
states and squabbling over navigation rights of rivers and ports. On top of it all, there was no judicial
branch to settle interstate disputes. The 13 states operated more like 13 different countries because of
the lack of unity and structure.
Clearly, the Articles were terribly inadequate for freedom and prosperity. The U.S. government after 1776 was
insufficiently strong to protect rights through the rule of law. In fact, the Articles of Confederation led to close
calls with the rule of will.
In one of these instances, a Revolutionary War captain named Daniel Shays, who had sacrificed greatly for the
cause of independence, understood the injustices of excessive taxation. Being away from his farm for the war
took its toll and Shays, like many other farmers in Western Massachusetts, found himself heavily in debt.
In this difficult situation, Massachusetts tax collectors showed up and demanded payment. Shays was irate. To
him, this was completely backward: he shouldn’t be giving money to the government, he should be getting
money from the government. They should be paying him for his service and sacrifices during the war, not taking
money from him when he could least afford it because of that service.
Shays had just finished fighting one war against unjust taxation and he had no problem fighting another one. He
organized his neighbors into an armed mob and they ran the tax collectors off, marched on the courts that had
ordered these collections, and overthrew the local government. They were heading to seize a weapons arsenal
to do the same at the state level when the Massachusetts militia showed up and put down the uprising before it
gained unstoppable momentum. In what is now called Shay's Rebellion, people lost their lives, liberties, and
properties because the government lacked the power to protect them or to collect taxes to pay Revolutionary
War veterans.
17
“Toothless” refers to a law (or rule) that has no effect because there is no enforcement. Here the Articles of Confederation created
only a legislative branch. Therefore, the congress did not have a “police power” to enforce their laws whether it was by an executive
branch or a judicial branch.

These close calls made thoughtful Americans nervous. James Madison, in particular, realized that the
government under the Articles was not strong enough to secure liberty. Americans had so despised the tyranny
of King George that they had swung too far towards the other extreme of anarchy.
III. Convention or Bust!
Keeping up with the trend of 3s in this reading, there are three men in particular that were essential to making
the Constitutional Convention happen: George Washington, James Madison, and Alexander Hamilton. In fact,
one historian described it this way: “Among those who began early to work for reform three names stand out:
Washington, Madison and Hamilton.”
18 Each of these men had mounting concerns about the young nation
falling to anarchy because of disunity. Madison and Washington exchanged letters during the time of Shays’
Rebellion speaking to this worry.
Madison wrote, “No morn ever dawned more favorable than ours did - and no day was ever more
clouded than the present!”

Washington responded, [The country appears] “fast verging to anarchy and confusion. What stronger
evidence can be given of the want of energy in our governments than these disorders? Will not the wise
and good strive hard to avert this evil?”

Hamilton, as well, believed that a stronger central government was necessary to bring stability and
peace to the fractured union because central governments were the institutions that had the authority
to make trade policy. The increasing trade disputes with seaports and imported goods “persuaded
Hamilton that unless a new federal government with a monopoly on customs revenues was established,
disunion would surely ensue. As individual states developed interests in their own taxes, they would be
less and less likely to sacrifice for the common good.”

Recognizing the problems at hand and the threats to the American principles outlined in the Declaration of
Independence, these men decided to organize an effort to amend the Articles of Confederation. Each of these
men had a vital role to play in calling for and making the Constitutional convention a
success.
George Washington, the stabilizing factor:
Madison persuaded Washington to come to the convention as the meeting’s
president, just like Washington had done at the Mt. Vernon convention in 1785.
Washington understood the implications of his presence and rose to the occasion.
“Deeply aware of his symbolic role, he wore his military uniform when he
accepted the meeting’s presidency on May 25, 1787, and he presided with

the firm and quiet dignity of a judge, speaking rarely and keeping delegates in line.”

Washington’s presence and comportment during the convention helped to inspire the delegates to
imagine how an executive branch could exist in their new government. “Pierce Butler of South Carolina
opined that they would not have made it so strong ‘had not many members cast their eyes toward
General Washington as president and shaped their ideas of the powers to a president by their opinions
of his Virtue.’”

James Madison, the political philosopher:
Madison formulated ideas through persistent reading, studying and personal
observation. He spent time during the spring and summer of 1786 building up a
knowledge for writing a constitution by having Thomas Jefferson send him books
“by the hundreds from Europe - histories of confederations from ancient Greece to
modern Switzerland in French and Latin as well as English, works of political theory
from the Enlightenment and earlier.”
24 Madison was more convinced from these
studies and through his experience that “confederacies fail when they lack a
strong central authority.”

Once Hamilton proposed another convention for 1787, Madison began to lay the groundwork for his
constitutional theory in his written analysis, “Vices of the Political System of the United States.” As he
worked out his theories on paper, Madison presented a prepared agenda. This agenda, called the
Virginia Plan, was really an outline of a new republican form of government and became the starting
point for the delegates to debate. This is also one of the reasons why Madison is known as the “Father
of the Constitution”.
Alexander Hamilton, the visionary:
Hamilton had a problem with the Articles of Confederation from the beginning
because of its weak power to generate and collect money. “In 1780, far in advance
of anyone else, he had recommended a convention to remedy the articles.”

Hamilton described the country as a collection of “petty states … jarring, jealous
and perverse,”
27 and he understood that people were regionalistic, or loyal to their
state, and feared those who were nationalistic, or loyal to their country. Hamilton’s
vision was that the citizens could have both loyalty to their state and country
through a stronger central government that allowed the citizens of the different
states to have better trade relations with each other. His home state of New York
was not the most populated state, as you see from the previous census chart
above. However, New York had control over the best seaports and waterways for

commerce and trade. It was going to be tough to persuade his own state to give up some power in order
to obtain more peace and prosperity.
Hamilton played two key pivotal roles at this time.
#1 - In 1786, at the Annapolis convention, he engineered “the calling of a national convention to
rewrite the Articles of Confederation.”

In essence, Hamilton got the ball rolling.
#2 - Starting in 1787, his “best-known contribution to the making of the Constitution [was] his
co-authorship of The Federalist.”

It was a series of articles written by John Jay, James Madison
and Hamilton that “began as a propaganda tract, aimed only at winning the election for
delegates to New York’s ratifying convention,” but quickly “evolved into the classic commentary
upon the American federal system.”

In May of 1787, representatives from the other colonies began arriving in Philadelphia. Some of them are
well-known today (e.g. George Washington, Benjamin Franklin, and Alexander Hamilton), while others are not.
But almost all of them were remarkable, wise men who made important contributions to the final version of the
Constitution. Their average age was 42. Most had graduated from college and belonged to the elite professions
in America (lawyers, planters, merchants, etc.). Eight had signed the Declaration of Independence and all had
extensive political experience in their state governments and/or the Congress. In short, they were all
well-equipped for the task at hand.
A Written Constitution
Those who gathered at the Constitutional Convention were in a unique position to create something
revolutionary. Unlike the British form of government which had been developed over hundreds of years,
this new Constitution would be a formal mechanism that explicitly described the forms, structures,
powers, and relationships of government entities. These written words would define and constrain
power, making it sufficient to protect the “general welfare” and provide for the “common defense,” but
prohibit its actions outside those enumerated (or listed in the document) powers. Underlying its creation
would be the focus on:
● the rule of law,
● the power of the people,
● the consent of the governed in electing its representatives,
● the fact that freedom is protected by placing limits on those in power
One of the main lessons learned from the Articles of Confederation was that the United States needed a
document that could "grow and develop to meet the changing needs of an advancing world."
31 The
Founders made this possible with the Constitution by instituting an easier amendment process
compared to the Articles of Confederation. While it is still not a quick process, the difficulty is

purposefully built into the Constitution so the document cannot be amended without the necessary
debate and authority of the people.
IV. The Great Debates and Compromises

After arriving, the delegates immediately got down to business. First, they elected George Washington president
of the convention. His leadership and celebrity during the Revolutionary War made this choice a foregone
conclusion and the participants would keep him in mind as they designed the office of the President of the
United States. Washington would say little during the Convention, but he gave a crucial calming, unifying
presence to the proceedings.
Next, Madison headed to the front of the hall to take notes. He knew future generations would be interested in
the “intentions of the Founders” and only a meticulous record could provide that.
Governor Randolph started the proceedings with an extremely controversial first motion: to do away with the
Articles of Confederation entirely and replace them with Madison's plan for a new government. This was
revolutionary. Many delegates protested that their states had given them instructions not to abolish the Articles
and threatened to leave. As the convention went on, many would make good on that threat, but, to their credit,
most of the delegates remained to at least see what Randolph had in mind. Randolph’s proposal kicked off the
first of three major debates that defined the proceedings of the convention for the rest of the summer.
Debate #1 - Large v. Small States
The first debate was between the large states and the small states. This was the most protracted and
contentious of all issues and took the majority of the summer to resolve. Remember that since 1776
each of these states was like an independent country and intensely jealous of their autonomy. In 1786,
you weren’t an American, but a Virginian, New Yorker, Georgian, and so on. The Articles of Confederation
loosely bound these states, but this didn’t make these thirteen little nations into one big nation. The
Congress had been a distant body that didn’t do much, which was a good thing in the minds of most
because the tyranny of a distant, central government was what they had fought the Revolution to get
away from. The small states were especially afraid of having their independence swallowed up by the
larger states in a national government.
All of the delegates agreed a stronger central government was needed, but the real issue was how to
determine representation in that new government. Madison’s “Virginia Plan'' proposed a strong national
government with three branches of government: a judicial branch, an executive branch, and a bicameral
legislature, but also proposed that representation be based on population. This was anathema to the
smaller states. Under the Articles, each state received one vote - no matter how large or small - and
that’s why the smaller states liked it. This arrangement gave them comparatively more power: a small
state would have 1/13th of the power even if they only had 1/100th of the population. To the large
states, on the other hand, Madison’s proposal was better and more democratic. Why should a state with
far more people have the same say in the national government as one with far fewer people?


Although the delegates would eventually accept the basic structure of Madison’s plan, many couldn’t
swallow the idea of a government in which representation was purely popular. Those from smaller states
like New Jersey and Delaware knew that representation based on population alone would overwhelm
and dilute their say in government, so William Paterson of New Jersey made a counter-proposal which
we today call the “New Jersey Plan.” Paterson’s plan would strengthen the national government by giving
it more power to tax and act, but would keep the one branch, one-state-one-vote system that had been
in place under the Articles of Confederation.
This heated debate about representation lasted all summer and almost killed the Convention. It was
finally resolved with what we call “The Great Compromise,” aptly named because without the
compromise there would have been no United States Constitution. The Great Compromise answered the
question of state or population based representation with a system in which we could use both methods
of representation in the legislature. Remember that Madison had proposed two houses of Congress, or a
“bicameral legislature.” Why not have one of the houses represent according to population and the
other represent each
state equally? States
would send
representatives to the
House of
Representatives based
on their population,
but would each send
the same number of
representatives to the
Senate (two) regardless
of population. This
proposal eventually
satisfied the delegates
from both the large
and small states (see
graph).
The Great Compromise also applied to the selection of the president in what became the Electoral
College. While we sometimes say that we vote for the president, in reality we vote as a state for electors
who in turn vote for the president. How many electors each state receives is determined through a
combination of state and popular representation. A state has electoral votes equal to the number of its
Senators (state) and Representatives in the House (popular). So if a state’s population entitled them to
three seats in the House of Representatives, then that state would have five electoral votes for president
(3 Representatives + 2 Senators). So we see the Great Compromise at work in the selection of all three
branches of government (albeit indirectly in the case of the judiciary). With this compromise, the
Convention had overcome its greatest hurdle.
Debate #2 - North v. South

The second major debate at the Constitutional Convention was between the northern and southern
states. The North-South split was easily the most important division in the history of our country and, of
course, eventually led to civil war. Although this schism centered on slavery, it went beyond into larger
cultural and economic questions. The North was commercial and industrial while the South was
agricultural and plantation-based. The South had (and still has to a degree) a more communal social
system based on kinship ties and honor, while the North had an individualistic culture based on contract.
Delegates from the South understood that they could increase their power at the expense of the North
by including slaves in the population count. Remember, a state’s say in the new government would be
partly determined by the number of its people, so the South wanted to inflate its population numbers by
including the slaves in the census. The northerners responded that the southerners couldn’t have it both
ways: either the slaves were people entitled to rights and representation (in which case they shouldn't
be slaves at all), or they shouldn’t be counted in the population. Those from the South would not budge
on the issue and this put the Convention at another impasse.
Most of the Founding Fathers were against slavery (even though many of them held slaves) and wanted
to see it abolished. In fact, George Mason wouldn’t even sign the Constitution because it allowed the
abominable institution to continue. But most of them felt that they could make a concession on slavery
that would create a union now and leave it to later generations to do away with it. That is exactly what
happened and we must give credit to the Founders for their foresight on this, even if we also condemn
many of them as hypocritical slaveholders.

The agreement they finally came to is called “The Three-Fifths Compromise” which was not a new idea.
This compromise was proposed in 1783 to try and change the way taxes were calculated under the
Articles of Confederation. The amendment did not pass because the Articles of Confederation required a
unanimous vote and some of the
southern states did not want their
slave population counted towards
their tax calculation. The southern
states were now willing to make this
compromise, but how does one count
a 3/5ths vote? This sounds
complicated, but it really meant that
5 slaves equaled 3 votes. One could
also look at this as a 60%
compromise. Here is a graphic using
Virginia as an example to help
illustrate this idea.
Some may think the Founders were racist in agreeing to a compromise that considered enslaved
African-Americans as "less than a full person." However, the Three-Fifths Compromise may have allowed
33
It should be noted that many slaveholders were legally incapable of freeing their slaves either because the slaves were seen by banks as
collateral for debt, because the slaves were entailed to an estate the current owner had no control over, or the local laws outright forbid
the freeing of slaves. Some of the Founders tried to change these unjust laws in the colonies where they lived, with varying success.
14
for the eventual abolition of slavery. If the Founders had allowed the South to count each enslaved
person towards representation, it would have given so much power to the South that Abraham Lincoln,
the Great Emancipator, may not have been elected. Had the Founders not allowed any compromise at all
on the slavery issue, they may not have been able to form the United States as we know it today. While it
was and continues to be a contentious issue, we owe the union of the 13 states to the Three-Fifths
Compromise.
Debate #3 - Federal v. States
The third and final major debate at the Convention was over the relationship between the states and the
new Federal Government. Formal compromises resolved the first two debates, but this one was much
trickier since it involved the question of “sovereignty.” We don’t use the word “sovereignty” much
anymore, but it essentially answers the question, “Where does the buck stop?” When push comes to
shove in government, who has the final say? Prior to 1787, state governments had clearly been
sovereign and acted as their own little countries. Would they now surrender this sovereignty to the
federal government under the new Constitution?
Madison and others tried to placate the states by saying that both national and state governments would
be sovereign under the new Constitution. But how could this be when sovereignty, by definition, is
indivisible? The whole point of sovereignty is to locate the one final authority in government matters.
They eventually found their way out of this dilemma with words rather than substance. They said that,
unlike in a monarchy where the king sat atop the pyramid of authority, America would be a republic with
the people on top; the people would be sovereign. So, no, we wouldn’t and couldn’t divide the
sovereignty of the people - it was indivisible - but you could divide the representation of the sovereign
people. States and the federal government could co-exist as two separate expressions of the sovereignty
of the American people
themselves.
This was not a satisfactory
answer. The Founders came
up with a slogan “e pluribus
unum” to describe the new
nation: “out of many, one”.
However, this debate is still
with us. The federal
government has steadily
accrued more power since
the founding, but states still
claim prerogatives and the
debate over what belongs in
the state or federal sphere
continues to this day.

V. The Miracle at Philadelphia
34
After overcoming these three enormous hurdles, the Founders finally declared themselves satisfied with their
handiwork and on September 17, 1787, came forward one by one to sign the Constitution. It had taken all
summer, but they all realized they had accomplished something remarkable, even supernatural. Many referred
to the Constitution as a “miracle.” Washington, for example, maintained for the rest of his life that God had been
with them in the Convention as much as he had been with them on the battlefield. Why would he say that and
why do we still speak of a “divinely inspired Constitution” today?
Content
First, the content of the Constitution was miraculous. It established a remarkable system of government
(not “perfect,” but “more perfect” in the Founders’ words). This inspired document contains the most
effective and appropriate means for dividing power that humans ever devised. The secret to freedom is
the division of power, and our Constitution masterfully sets up a structure that balanced power which
preserves liberty. It has weathered many storms and prevented the abuses of power that come when
power remains unchecked.
Success
Second, the Constitution did nothing less than create the first and most enduring liberal democracy in
history. America is not the only free country in the world today, but it has been the freest country over
the course of the last three centuries. No other nation comes close to offering so much freedom to so
many people for so long. France, Japan, and Germany, for example, are all exemplary free countries
today, but were tyrannies as recently as 1945 or even 1989 in the case of East Germany. The
Latin-American states never united as did the North American states and the differences are stark as we
observe the cycle of tyranny and anarchy still playing out among many states south of the U.S. border
today. Divided Europe, while currently stable and free, has been plagued by recurrent wars between
themselves as well as civil wars. Who is to say this would not also have been the fate of America had not
the Constitution bound the independent states together? Perhaps only divine inspiration can fully
explain this success.
Note also the elegance of the U.S. Constitution. It is as thin as a pamphlet and an educated person can
read it thoroughly in less than an hour. Simplicity, clarity, and precision are political virtues and the
Constitution has them. Contrast it with the European Union Constitution which is thousands of pages
long and requires weeks of labor and a team of lawyers just to decipher it. The U.S. Constitution is direct
enough to give us guidance, but open enough for flexibility in application.
Participants
Third, the participants themselves were miraculous. Thomas Jefferson once dubbed the Convention an
“assembly of demi-gods” - the most gifted assemblage of political minds in history. Almost any one of
the delegates would have been the greatest statesman of their time had they lived in any other age, and
yet in Philadelphia in 1787 (with a much smaller population to draw from than today), there were 55.
The likelihood of this much talent being in one place at one time in such a small country defies the laws


of probability. Even secular historians are stumped by this “fantastic coincidence.” Once again,
providential intervention may be the only adequate explanation.
Compromises
Fourth and finally, there were miracles in the compromises the delegates agreed to. The Spirit of the Lord
is the spirit of goodwill, humility, and being willing to listen to and understand other viewpoints. Only
such a spirit can account for the degree to which the delegates put aside narrow interests and prejudices
to create the American nation. In fact, there was one moment in the convention when the fighting was
particularly heated and Benjamin Franklin, who had been sitting quietly in the back, finally spoke up.
Everyone calmed down, hushed, and listened as the sage of Philadelphia, the great Franklin, said, “[T]he
longer I live, the more convincing proofs I see of this truth - that God Governs in the affairs of men. And
if a sparrow cannot fall to the ground without his notice, is it probable that an empire can rise without
his aid?” Even though they didn’t hire a chaplain to offer formal prayers in the Convention (they lacked
funds to pay one) the advice was sound and heeded individually. Compromise came only after Franklin’s
wise admonition.
The following is a chart of the summary of differences between the Articles of Confederation and the US
Constitution.
Finally, as President of the convention, Washington sent Congress the final documents to start the ratification
process that included a cover note that said,
“Just as ‘individuals entering into society, must give up a share of liberty to preserve the rest, [so the
states agreed to cede some] rights of their independent sovereignty to … provide for the interest and
safety of all [in a] spirit of … mutual deference and concession.”


VI. The Battle for Ratification
After the signing of the Constitution in Philadelphia, each state held a special “ratifying convention.” The
Constitution would only become the law of the land if the conventions of at least nine states approved. Many in
the states, treasuring their autonomy, resisted ratification. Americans had just fought a war against a centralized
government and were fearful of instituting another one. Furthermore, since the Constitution transferred power
from state to national government, local politicians would have their own power weakened. Their self-interest
was in opposition to ratification.
So a debate broke out in the states
between two opposing groups. Those
who favored the ratification of the
Constitution were called “Federalists”
and those who opposed ratification,
“Anti-Federalists.” To convince the
American people to ratify the
Constitution (especially those in swing
states like New York), three gifted
Federalist authors, Alexander Hamilton,
James Madison, and John Jay, took up
their pens and wrote a series of
editorials promoting and defending the
Constitution (see the graph on the
right). Hamilton later collected and
published these editorials as The
Federalist Papers. Although their purpose was a rhetorical one, an unintended consequence of The Federalist
Papers was to give the world one of the greatest works of political philosophy and the best first-hand explanation
of the workings and design of the U.S. Constitution.
Federalist Number 10
One of the most famous of The Federalist Papers is Federalist Number 10. This essay, written by James Madison,
tackles the concern about power congregating into the hands of one or a few groups, what he calls “factions,”
rather than allowing many groups to check and balance each other.
Today we sometimes think of factions as special interest groups. Citizens from many different walks of life have
an interest in how the government operates: farmers, bankers, educators, people of many different religious
persuasions, and more. People with similar goals and ideologies often organize into groups to promote their
goals, and this is a vital part of how free governments work. However, if any one group were able to gain so
much power that they were able to override the interests and rights of others, the free government could
become a tyranny. Oppression by powerful groups had led to tyranny and the downfall of governments
throughout history, and the Founders did not want this type of dangerous faction (or tyranny of the majority) to
take control of the United States.

The people had experienced these dangerous factions under their own state republic governments. State
governments wanted to correct the error of having an oppressive executive branch by cutting it out altogether
and making a very strong legislative branch. This overcorrection had the effect of concentrating power into one
place, the legislative branch. This allowed for factions to grow more powerful. Therefore, the people feared
factions and wanted to ban them by law. Madison is persuading the people to turn against that idea by
explaining:
“Liberty is to faction what air is to fire, an ailment without which it instantly expires. But it could not be
less folly to abolish liberty, which is essential to political life, because it nourishes faction, than it would
be to wish the annihilation of air, which is essential to animal life, because it imparts to fire its
destructive agency.”

Thankfully, James Madison had a solution to this problem and he discussed it in Federalist Number 10. He
explained that although we can’t do away with factions, we can minimize the potential of tyrannical effects by
multiplying the number of factions through a large republic. In a small republic, one faction could easily become
a majority, get control over the government, and exercise tyrannical control over others, but in a large republic,
the many factions would neutralize one another. The larger the republic, the harder it would be for one special
interest group to gain majority power since each faction would be but one faction among many. In Madison’s
words:
“[T]he influence of factious leaders may kindle a flame within their particular States but will be unable to
spread a general conflagration through the other States.”

Political theorists had long assumed that a republic needed to be small so the representatives were local, known,
visible, and more directly accountable to the people. These are all clear benefits of a small republic. But Madison
showed that while a small republic had the advantage of keeping power closer to the people, it also had the
disadvantage of making it possible for a single faction to dominate the government. In large republics, the
factions compete and cancel each other out and can check and balance each other. According to Madison in
Federalist Number 10, a large republic would be more stable and less susceptible to both tyranny and anarchy.
To prove that Madison was correct on this point, we need look no further than our own U.S. history. In the 19th
century American South, white Americans (the majority) voted to oppress black Americans through Jim Crow
laws. This discirimination, legally upheld and enforced by the government, came about through the majority
rule. In the “small republic” southern states, the white-supremacist faction outnumbered the African-Americans
and could thereby democratically tyrannize them. But in the large republic of the United States, the
white-supremacist faction was diluted and outnumbered by those who wanted more racial equality.
We also see Madison’s wisdom on display in Church history. When the Latter-day Saints settled in Missouri, an
anti-Mormon faction took control of the state government and elected Lilburn Boggs as governor. Boggs then
proceeded to issue an “extermination order” against the Saints. This was a classic example of democratic

tyranny. The anti-Mormon faction in Missouri was large and powerful enough to dominate politics. It was just
such a “tyranny of the majority” that the Constitution was designed to prevent in the nation as a whole.
We can see the wisdom of Federalist Number 10 by comparing the United States of North America to the divided
countries of South America. After their revolutions against Spanish rule, Latin America remained fragmented into
many small nations. As predicted in Federalist Number 10, these small republics have had the tendency to have
issues with instability, military coups, corruption, and hyperinflation because their small size has made them
susceptible to factional control.
Finally, the Founders’ decision to institute the Electoral College as the means of electing the president of the
United States is a manifestation of their concern about the tyranny of the majority. The Electoral College is a
method of distributing the power and decision-making to the states so there is not a bare majority needed to
elect the president, which would inevitably lead to the very “tyranny of the majority” that the Founders dreaded.
The benefits of small and large republics find their manifestation in the divine principle of federalism which
allows the United States to enjoy the benefits of both small republics (the states) and a large republic (the
nation) in the same system. Throughout the nation’s history, this has been instrumental in combating the threat
of factions.
Federalist Number 10 and the rest of the 85 essays in the Federalist Papers are excellent illustrations of the
wisdom and far-sightedness of the Founders of the United States.
Ratification
Thanks to the Federalist authors, the Constitution was ratified by the necessary number of states in 1788. In
putting this document into place, the Founders gave life to the principles in the Declaration of Independence.
The Declaration of Independence gives us our goals as a nation - the lofty principles of liberty, equality, and
natural rights - while the Constitution gives us the mechanism of government with which to secure those goals.
The Declaration contains the ends of government; the Constitution provides the means. The two primary
documents of the Founding harmonize perfectly.
We will dive deeper into the specifics and significance of the United States Constitution in our next lesson.
