

GORDON-CONWELL THEOLOGICAL SEMINARY


THE PATRISTIC ONTOLOGY OF CREATIO EX NIHILO


A RESEARCH PAPER SUBMITTED TO DR. FAIRBAIRN
IN PARTIAL FULFILLMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS 
FOR THE COMPLETION OF CT 681 CHRISTIAN THOUGHT AND CLASSICAL PHILOSOPHY

BY
JONATHAN S. JONES
JACKSON, TENNESSEE
JULY 31, 2014
“I believe in God, Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth.” Every Sunday all around the world the majority of the Church begins corporate profession of faith with these words.  Both the Nicene Creed and the Apostle’s Creed assert this faith:  that the Christian God is the Creator of the world.  If its place at the fore of the great confessions is any indicator, this belief is crucial.  It is no coincidence that today one of world history’s worst periods of deterioration has come in a time when Western culture sees itself as increasingly secular.  Christianity offers a much needed vision of how this world relates to reality that lies outside and beyond it.  The fact that the world can be perceived as existing apart from its origins means that it has fundamentally separated itself from its life-giving roots.  This paper explores the patristic understanding of creation as it grew out of interactions with Platonic philosophy and its implications for Christians today.
Hellenistic philosophy bequeathed two views of cosmology:  those of Democritus and Plato.  Democritus approached understanding creation via an atomic theory similar to what has dominated modern times.  The universe exists, according to Democritus, as only one of an infinite number of others which were created without intermediaries and remains indivisible and indestructible.  Plato’s second and competing account of the world’s origins comes from which charts a path diametrically opposed to that of Democritus, and it became the view with which the early church had to contend the most.
Plato believed in a single universe that had a beginning through the handiwork of a craftsman.  Through the mouth of the main character, Timaeus, Plato explicates his understanding of the world’s beginning:
Now everything that becomes or is created must of necessity be created by some cause, for without a cause nothing can be created.  The work of the creator, whenever he looks to the unchangeable and fashions the form and nature of his work after an unchangeable pattern, must necessarily be made fair and perfect; but when he looks to the created only, and uses a created pattern, it is not fair or perfect.  
Notice that the creator fashions the world after the pattern of some already existing world which surpasses the beauty and perfection of the creation.  The “creator” makes based on something that is already present, a world which he/she exists within and, therefore, does not create anything.  He is no creator but a copier.  Even the material used in creation had been pre-existing:  “To which end we must consider the nature of fire, and water, and air, and earth, such as they were prior to the creation of the heaven…”  Contrary to the God of Genesis who speaks and creates existence to form his new world, Plato’s architect works with material already provided and, therefore, is not a creator in the strict sense. 
Plato’s cosmology described in the Timaeus really is not a creation account at all.  There is no answer to the question about ultimate origins of the world and eventually this developed into competing ideas of how the world relates to God.  If matter is co-eternal, then it must be co-equal with God.  To be God means to be totally free and sovereign over everything else.  Plato’s architect cannot be God truly since there is existence outside of his control.  Ultimately, Plato and subsequent cosmologies are unable to truly distinguish ontologically between a Creator and creation.  This Platonic inheritance eventually led to the development of Gnostic cosmology which the early church had to combat to forge her the doctrine of creatio ex nihilo.  
For the early church, the doctrine of creation was not a very detailed doctrine because the Bible itself is not very explicit.  Instead, they inherited a worldview founded on the creational monotheism of Israel which meant the created order was fundamentally “good” because the God who made it was good and He continues to be involved in it.  
Genesis 1-3 does not explicitly affirm an ex nihilo understanding but belongs to a certain time period of Israel’s history that speaks to different issues.  The Genesis account dates back to Israel’s Babylonian exile.  By way of several obvious parallels to the Babylonian version of creation, the Enuma Elish, Genesis rejects the implicit views of chaos and destruction.  The Babylonians held that the world was formed out of a cosmic war between the god Marduk and unformed matter which had to be conquered.  Man was made, as in Genesis, as the last animal, but with the sole purpose of offering service to Marduk.  Genesis insists that the universe was created by God’s word, not war, and that every stage warranted a celebration because “it was good.”  These stories do not hypothesize about the beginning of time and space; they project a world view that interprets reality as a manifestation of divine reason and goodness.  The symbols of war or Word compete as the true description of creation’s meaning. 
Genesis relates creation to God as the object of His free initiative.  The vocabulary used to describe God’s creating activity denotes only divine activity, thus anchoring the meaning of creation in divine interaction.  Pelikan concludes that “Creation, therefore, is principally an account not of origins but of dependence.  It is intended to say primarily not how things began but how they are in relation to God.”  The best expression of Israel’s view of creation, what Brueggemann has labeled “the fullest rendition of creation faith in the Old Testament”, comes through in Psalm 104:
He wraps Himself in light as if it were a robe, spreading out the sky like a canopy, laying the beams of His palance on the waters above, making the clouds His chariot, walking on the wings of the wind…He established the earth on its foundations; it will never be shaken. You covered it with the deep as if it were a garment; the waters stood above the mountains.  At Your rebuke the waters fled…mountains rose and valleys sank...How countless are Your works, LORD!  In wisdom you have made them all... (Ps. 104.1-8, 24)
In the New Testament a Christian doctrine of creation begins to form, but not in the sense of cosmological origins.  Key texts such as John 1.3, Hebrews 1.2 and Ephesians 1.10 all stress the central role of Jesus in creation.  By spreading the gospel to all corners of the earth, soteriology and creation become linked together.  As Blowers has stated, “The Christian doctrine of creation thus develops within the framework of a universalizing gospel that has as its very center the cosmic Christ…through whom all created things exist… and under whose rule all creation will be subdued…”   The New Testament writers discerned a renewing dynamic inherent within the evangelism message drawing creation back to its Creator, Jesus Christ. This understanding of the “cosmic Christ” reached its fullest expression in the late fourth century when Jesus as the divine Logos had become so integrated with understanding creation that he was interpreted as “the divine clue” to all reality and existence.
So long as Christianity stayed within its Jewish context, neither a defense of creation’s temporal nature nor its goodness was ever at risk.  As soon as Christians sought to convert the Greeks, however, a doctrine of creation became a demanding priority.  Over the course of the first two centuries, the early church forged her doctrine of creatio ex nihilo as a means of distancing herself from the then-popular Greek philosophical concepts present in Gnosticism.  
Justin Martyr blended thoughts drawn from Plato and the Bible to defend the reasonableness of God as Creator.  Similar thoughts can also be found in writers as early as Aristides and Tatian, though these comments are disparate and undeveloped in the sense of any dogmatic creatio ex nihilo.  Theophilus of Antioch and Tertullian were the earliest church leaders to put forth any clear doctrine of creatio ex nihilo.
Theophilus in Greek-speaking Antioch and Tertullian in Latin-speaking Carthage defended the temporal nature of creation against the philosophical understanding of the world’s eternal existence.  For the world to be eternally existent means a denial of God’s sovereignty over it.  “But the power of God is manifested in this,” said Theophilus, “that out of things that are not He makes whatever He pleases; just as the bestowal of life and motion is the prerogative of no other than God alone.”  Theophilus supported a creatio ex nihilo by claiming it as explicitly taught by the Bible based on Rom. 4.17 and Heb. 11.3 and traced the origin of matter to an act of God.  Thus, Theophilus fought the eternal existence of the world and divinity’s dependence upon it and “declared creatio ex nihilo as proof that the dependency in the relation between God and the world was all in one direction.”  
Tertullian puts forth a clear expression of matter’s creation in the Treatise against Hermogenes.  He writes
This rule is required by the nature of the One-only God, who is One-only in no other way than as the sole God; and in no other way sole, than as having nothing else (co-existent) with Him.  So also He will be first, because all things are after Him; and all things are after Him, because all things are by Him; and all things are by Him, because they are of nothing…Because there was present with Him no power, no material, no nature which belonged to any other than Himself.
Because of the threat to God’s sovereignty if matter were co-eternal, Christianity’s doctrine of creation quickly became synonymous with creatio ex nihilo.  But, ex nihilo did not exhaust the Church’s stance against Platonism’s stance on matter’s eternality.  The God who creates needed to be connected with the God who acts within history.  At this point, Gnosticism posed a great threat with its radically divergent understanding of creation and salvation.
The term “Gosticism” does not refer to one specific group of people but rather denotes a broad movement with followers who considered themselves elite Christians possessing a superior wisdom.  Common characteristics include four basic tenets:  1) a total opposition between the created world and the spiritual world; 2) the created world is the result of a chaotic rebellion against the spiritual world; 3) man has a spiritual element held captive by the body; and 4) man’s liberation as only achieved by divine knowledge of a mediator.  Distilled further, Kelly identifies the core of the gnostic disagreement with the budding Church as their view of creation and the process of history as inherently evil and man’s barrier to salvation.  In several ways, Gnosticism portrayed the world similarly to the Babylonian Enuma Elish (for example, the world being formed out of cosmic chaos).  As the Genesis account rejected the Babylonian cosmology, likewise the early church opposed Gnostic views of creation.
Gnosticism posed its greatest threat through the teaching of two second-century leaders, namely Marcion and Basiledes.  Marcion believed in two gods, a distant god who is good, and a redeemer-god.   A demiurge had fashioned the world out of pre-existent matter that was evil.  For Marcion, a god who makes out of perverted material must himself be wicked.  Here one sees both pre-existent matter and an intermediary architect in common with Platonism.  Basilides recognized the contradiction between pre-existent matter and God’s omnipotence and attempted a rudimentary, yet more developed, articulation of creatio ex nihilo.  But, he would not allow his creator-god to be involved in the process or sustaining of creation.  In this way Basilides sets up a world that is able to exist autonomously, and therefore, outside of its Creator’s sovereignty.  
Irenaeus combined creatio ex nihilo with the Platonic distinction between being and becoming to generate definitively the fundamental Creator/creation distinction understanding of God’s relationship with the world.  Consequently, this allows Irenaeus to safeguard God’s sovereignty and creation’s freedom simultaneously.  Irenaeus argues that it is reasonable to say that God created the world.  “While men, indeed, cannot make anything out of nothing, but only out of matter already existing, yet God is in this point preeminently superior to men, that He Himself called into being the substance of His creation, when previously it had not existence.”  Irenaeus’ argument proceeds from the unequivocal foundation that there is only one reality—God’s reality in which He is the Creator while all else is created.  
…He (the Creator) made all things freely, and by His own power, and arranged and finished them, and His will is the substance of all things, then He is discovered to be the one only God who created all things, who alone is Omnipotent, and who is the only Father founding and forming all things, visible and invisible, such as may be perceived by our senses and such as cannot, heavenly and earthly, “by the word of His power;” and He has fitted and arranged all things by His wisdom, while He contains all things, but He Himself can be contained by no one:  He is the Former, He the Builder, He the Discoverer, He the Creator, He the Lord of all; and there is no on besides Him, or above Him…
In his Creator/creation distinction, Irenaeus differentiates the types of being between God and man thus articulating a “distance of natures.”   If something is, then it is unchangingly which can only apply to God.  Creation is not but becomes implying a perpetual state of evolving.  It either progresses toward a fuller state of being, or regresses in its existence toward non-being.  Furthermore, creation must depend upon that which called it into existence to continue sustaining its existence; creation only progresses in its becoming as it recognizes and embraces its contingent nature.  This radical distinction between God as being and the world as becoming properly integrates and distinguishes the two, preventing any collapse of one into the other (pantheism) or setting the two at odds against each other (dualism). God and the world are affirmed in their intertwined existence as well as their differences.  
Irenaeus also preserves God’s freedom and consequently awards the created order its highest status as a free gift.  If the world were something that flowed out of God’s essence in Himself, it could not be deemed “good” in any real sense.  The only way for creation’s goodness to be real is only in the face of its possible non-existence.  A ray has no choice but to emanate from the sun, and the sun cannot refuse to send out its rays.  But, creation is a manifestation of God’s free will and expresses His inherent goodness.  Creation could have not existed, it does not have to be.  Therefore, it is a gift of God, a visible manifestation of His free grace.  
For the Church’s theology, Irenaeus countered Gnostic dualism by eliminating the possibility of two ontologically equal yet autonomous spheres of reality.  This precludes Platonism’s eternally existent world.  Were any other world to exist eternally outside of God, completely severed and independent from His sovereignty, then this would constitute a power limiting God and, therefore, would actually be God itself.  By definition of being God and Creator all things must be contained in Him, for nothing can exist outside of God.  
Irenaeus’ radical distinction between God as Creator and the world as created properly relates the two.  God and the world are affirmed in their intertwined existence as well as their differences.  And, every time congregations confess faith in “God, the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth,” they join the chorus of Faith through the ages with those like Theophilus, Tertullian, and Irenaeus.
Jaroslav Pelikan has called the doctrine of creatio ex nihilo the “test case” for the relation between human reason and divine revelation.  The ontological distinction between Creator and creation developed as the Church’s first major doctrine because at stake was the framing for all subsequent understanding of the Christian message.   It guarded the faith against pagan pantheism, Gnosticism, and Marcion’s dualism.  The Church continued harmonizing human reason with divine revelation in the Christological and Trinitarian controversies as she sought to determine on which side of the ontological divide the Son and Holy Spirit belonged.  The Council of Nicaea solidified this faith by issuing its official declaration beginning with “We believe in one God, the Father almighty, maker of all things visible and invisible.”
	In recent decades, scholars have responded to the current ecological crisis by holding forth a Christian understanding of creation.  Scholars and clergymen are lamenting the current situation of ecological destruction by highlighting its transcendent, theological meaning.  In other words, what creation is ought to determine what is done with it.  Christianity teaches that the world is the fruit of God’s work.  He did not have to create it, but did so out of a desire to share His own goodness with mankind.  To live, then, means to manifest God’s grace.  I believe that a thorough recovery of creatio ex nihilo would aid contemporary evangelicalism in a couple of ways.  First, I propose that the radical separation between creation and supernatural involvement needs overhauling, and that this would aid apologetic efforts from falling into traps unwittingly that are anti-Christian.  Second, scientific explorations have uncovered a connectedness within creation that is consistent with Trinitarian faith.  The Creator’s dynamic union is reflected in His creation even at the quantum level.   
Many evangelicals today assume that God’s activity in the world and natural causes are two mutually exclusive modes of action.  However, this actually reverses the ex nihilo scheme which affirms that God and the world are intertwined.  Such a reversal goes back to Augustine’s radical separation between grace and nature.  Whereas ex nihilo vindicated creation’s goodness in spite of suffering, Augustine sought to balance this with a thorough articulation of nature’s corruption without recreating a dualistic framework.  Grace became Augustine’s label for God’s sustaining and redeeming presence through creation, but emphasized that grace remained separate from it.  Because his system was so highly developed, the two were never reconnected, and this eventually led to the West’s radical separation between the natural and supernatural, and a further breaking point between the churches in the East and West.  For the early church, the world and its processes were seen as a manifestation of God’s grace in itself.  If Evangelicals doing apologetics maintained this connection, then difficult conversations such as the Genesis-versus-evolution debate would change their tune.  Creation and evolution do not have to exist dichotomously.  Genesis does not explain how creation came about, rather it unveils what creation is: the initiation of a loving God who desires to commune with his creation.  
Inherent within ex nihilo is a dynamic that allows room for continual reflection and deeper revelation.  Creatio ex nihilo received deeper meaning as the church continued clarifying her theology via Christology and Trinitarian theology.  As seen in the Creeds, creation is the starting point for theology but also the unfolding of a Trinitarian act that is centered around the incarnation of the Logos, hence the most detailed sections have to do with the Incarnation.  Embedded in the fabric of creation lies a testimony of the Trinitarian God disclosed in Jesus Christ.  Time and history receive their meaning from the moment its Creator becomes a part of it.  Perhaps this is what T.S. Eliot was thinking as he penned these words: 
In the beginning GOD created the world.  Waste and void. Waste and void.  And darkness was upon the face of the deep….Then came, at a predetermined moment, a moment in time and of time,/A moment not out of time, but in time, in what we call history:  transecting, bisecting the world of time, a moment in time but not like a moment of time,/  A moment in time but time was made through that moment:  for without the meaning there is no time, and that moment of time gave the meaning.
The Incarnation is the moment which makes all other moments.  “He is before all things, and by Him all things hold together,” says Paul (Col. 1.17).  
An evangelical cosmology that is at heart Christocentric remains faithful to the biblical text while keeping room open for new scientific understanding of the inner-workings of the universe.  For this very reason, Evangelicals should not feel bound to strictly literal understandings of Genesis.  Rather, they should embrace the entirety of the biblical narrative that understands Jesus as the Logos and maker of the cosmos holding  John 1 and Genesis 1 together.  As Ratzinger has said, “Christ frees us from the slavery of the letter, and precisely thus does he give back to us, renewed, the truth of the images.” Only when the Bible is understood as a whole can a text’s whole meaning be ascertained.  
Modern science has recently uncovered what is being called a “relational ontology” that reshapes the way physicists view the world.  John Polkinghorne has surveyed the various ways that recent scientific explorations have confirmed the relational nature of creation.  No longer can the motto “divide and rule” lead the way to understanding the world, as if matter’s meaning was exhausted comprehended comprehended at an atomic level.  Instead, at the quantum level, quarks cannot be separated but only exist in connection with other quarks.  This connectedness rooted in the deepest structure of matter bears cosmic consequences.  Although matter does not share in the emotional attributes of relationships (such as love, compassion, etc.), the fact that the universe is built with particles that only exist as connected with other particles points to creation’s relational nature stemming from its origin in a relational, Triune God.  Creation displays its own perichoresis, its own dance that binds everything together.
Christians affirm the world as having sprung forth from God’s love out of total freedom.  Kallistos Ware proposes that creatio ex nihilo could be better worded as creation ex amore.  For the church, this strongly resonates with the orthodox understanding of God as Trinity.  “Christian theology speaks of God as the One whose eternal being is constituted by the perichoretic exchange of love between the three divine Persons.  Thus the deepest reality is relational, and this will surely be the character of all that originates from that divine source.”  As Ratzinger also has stated, love constitutes the truest unity: “To him who believes in God as tri-une, the highest unity is not the unity of inflexible monotony…the authentic acme of unity is the unity created by love.” Just as the Trinity remains a mystery, so do the inner workings of creation.  But, Christians can rejoice that everything about life down to its very existence is a product and mimicry of Trinitarian action.

