The Creation out of Nothing of the Doctrine of Creation ex Nihilo
The significance of these texts for Latter-day Saints is not that
they teach a Latter-day Saint view of matter and of God—they do
not. Rather, they show that the view that God created ex nihilo was an
innovation that occurred around the end of the second century ad.
They show that a wholesale adoption of Middle Platonist views had
overrun the Christian apologists. As Hubler puts it:
Creatio ex nihilo marked a major redefinition of the material
cosmos by the Christian apologists of the late second century,
Tatian and Theophilus of Antioch. . . . For Stoic, Platonist,
and Peripatetic alike matter imposed the natural necessity of
corruption upon the body. The moral limitations imposed by
matter made a bodily resurrection seem offensive. Christian
hopes for a resurrection seemed misguided both intellectually and morally. The Christian apologists of the late second
century struck back by redefining matter as a creature of
God, which he directed to his purpose. The religious claims of the Christian apologists signaled a major philosophical
change.101
It must be noted, however, that the position adopted by Justin,
Athenagoras, Hermogenes, and Clement of Alexandria that God created by organizing matter was inherently unstable within the context
of their theology because each of them had espoused a thoroughly
Middle Platonic view of God. The early Christians had been accused of
being atheists (much the same way Latter-day Saints are now accused
of not being Christian) because they did not accept the Greek view
of the gods. Instead of responding by defending the Christian view
of a God who could reveal himself in flesh, Athenagoras argued that
Christians believed in the same God as the Greeks:
I have sufficiently shown that they are not atheists who
believe in One who is unbegotten, eternal, unseen, impassible,
incomprehensible and uncontained: comprehended by mind
and reason alone, invested with ineffable light and beauty and
spirit and power, by whom the universe is brought into being
and set in order and held firm, through the agency of his own
Logos.102
As we shall see, the adoption of the Middle Platonic notion of God
by Christian apologists in the late second century was a major motivating factor behind the invention of the doctrine of creatio ex nihilo.
In particular, God was conceived as being completely beyond and
independent of the world. Given the Middle Platonist view of God,
creation out of nothing became a logical extension of God’s otherness
and transcendence.
Copan and Craig argue that creatio ex nihilo did not develop in
the late second century as a result of the interaction between Greek
philosophy and Christian philosophers, that the doctrine was already
well established prior to that time. Once again, though, in taking this
position, Copan and Craig are departing from virtually every other scholar who has carefully treated the issue—except the group of conservative, evangelical writers that they rely on in their book—and thus
they arrive at a contrary conclusion.103 In the extensive investigation
regarding the origin of the doctrine of creatio ex nihilo in his 1995
doctoral dissertation, Hubler concludes:
Creatio ex nihilo appeared suddenly in the latter half of
the second century c.e. Not only did creatio ex nihilo lack
precedent, it stood in firm opposition to all the philosophical schools of the Greco-Roman world. As we have seen, the
doctrine was not forced upon the Christian community by
their revealed tradition, either in Biblical texts or the Early
Jewish interpretation of them. As we will also see it was not a
position attested in the New Testament doctrine or even subapostolic writings. It was a position taken by the apologists
of the late second century, Tatian and Theophilus, and developed by various ecclesiastical writers thereafter, by Irenaeus,
Tertullian, and Origen. Creatio ex nihilo represents an innovation in the interpretive traditions of revelation and cannot
be explained merely as a continuation of tradition.104
Hubler explores at length why the doctrine of creatio ex nihilo
suddenly appears at the end of the second century. The answer is that
Christian philosophers accepted two key Middle Platonist doctrines
that made creatio ex nihilo the only acceptable position to them. First,
they confronted the Middle Platonic view that “matter imposed the
natural necessity of corruption upon the body.”105 The doctrine of
bodily resurrection seemed offensive to the Greeks because it implied that persons would be eternally embodied in corruptible material
forms. The first Christian philosophers to adopt creatio ex nihilo
attacked this view of matter by redefining the matter of which the
body was made as a creation ex nihilo of God, which he directed to his
purposes.106 Second, these same philosophers also adopted the Middle
Platonic view that whatever is eternal is absolutely immutable or
unchangeable. They reasoned (fallaciously) that if God is immutable
in this sense, then matter cannot be unchanging like God. However,
given Platonic and Middle Platonist views that everything that is eternal is immutable and that matter cannot be immutable, it followed
that matter must be created ex nihilo.107 May reaches a similar conclusion in his extensive study:
If one reviews only the orthodox line of the development
that leads to the formation of the doctrine of creatio ex nihilo,
there emerges a picture unambiguous in its main outline. For
the primitive Christian thinkers the origin of the world does
not yet present a problem. Even in the early second century,
after the intensive concern of gnosticism with cosmology had
set in, the spokesmen for church Christianity still stand by
the traditional statements about the creation of the world and
do not allow themselves to get involved in controversy over
the new questions. At the same time philosophically educated
teachers like Justin interpret the creation as world-formation
and establish a relationship between the “cosmogony of Moses”
and the myth of world-creation in the Timaeus. . . . Then in
the controversy, partly conducted in parallel and partly overlapping with both the gnostic and the philosophical cosmologies, the world-formation model is overcome and the doctrine
of creatio ex nihilo formulated as a counter-proposition, which
as early as the beginning of the third century is regarded as a
fundamental tenet of Christian theology.108
Thus, it is not just Latter-day Saints who argue that the doctrine of creatio ex nihilo is essentially a philosophical innovation dating from the
end of the second century ad that was not contained in scripture—it
is the accepted view of virtually every scholar who has reviewed the
evidence at length, except Copan and Craig.
Though Tatian was a pupil of Justin, his views were quite different
from those of his teacher. He began by defining a new view of God:
“Our God has no origin in time, since he alone is without beginning
and himself is the beginning of all things.”109 The Middle Platonists
had adopted a view of God as transcendent and utterly independent
while limiting his involvement with the world to creation by matter
and the necessities inherent in matter. Tatian created a new view of
God, who is alone in his power and able to create matter out of nothing. Apparently, Tatian is the first person in history to expressly teach
the doctrine of creatio ex nihilo.110 The reason that matter had to be
created ex nihilo, according to Tatian, is that otherwise it would be
equal to God:
Neither is matter without cause as is God, nor is it equal
in power to God because it is without cause. It was generated
and it was not generated by anyone else, but it was expressed
only by the demiurge of all. Therefore, we believe that there
will be a resurrection of bodies after the consummation of
everything, not as the Stoics who dogmatize about cycles of
things becoming and the same things becoming again without purpose. When the ages are once completed for us at the end, there will be a resurrection of humans alone for ever for
the purpose of judgement.111
Tatian adopted the notion of the necessity of creation of matter to
address two problems: first, he sought to avoid the theory of eternal
cycles of matter taught by the Stoics; and second, he sought to establish the concept of God transcending a world caught in such an eternal cycle of material necessity. Tatian argued that matter is not an ultimate principle (ἄναρχον)—it is not uncaused—countering the Stoic
view that a personal resurrection makes no sense because everything
is bound by the necessity of an eternal recurrence in a never-ending
cycle (ἐκπύρωσις). Tatian’s rejection of eternal matter as an ἀρχή, or
uncaused principle, like God, removed matter from the eternal cycle
of never-ending recurrence and the necessity of ἐκπύρωσις.112 Tatian
also argued that it is not impossible for God to restore the dead to life
through resurrection because he can create individuals out of nothing
initially: “God the regent (μοναρχία), when he wills, will completely
restore the substance which is visible alone to him to its original
state.”113 For Tatian, matter is the sensible expression of the rational
Logos, derived from the Middle Platonic doctrine of internal reason
that gives form to matter through verbal expression.114 As Hubler concludes in his section on Tatian:
The coincidence of μοναρχία, the need to defend the resurrection and the Logos theology, conspired to produce an
entirely new understanding of the material cosmos and its
dependence upon God in Tatian’s work. His new vision was
seized upon almost immediately by other Christian writers
and soon became the new orthodoxy.115
So far as we can see, Tatian never considered the alternative of simply
rejecting the Stoic view of eternal recurrence as a necessary property of matter. Yet he could easily have done so without adopting an
entirely new doctrine of creatio ex nihilo.
Theophilus was the second person in history to expressly adopt
the view of creatio ex nihilo. He wrote shortly after Tatian, around
ad 180. However, Theophilus’s reasons for adopting this new dogma
went beyond Tatian’s. Rather than addressing the Stoics, as Tatian
had done, Theophilus argued directly against the Middle Platonists.
His argument accepted the basic premises of the Middle Platonists
about matter and then attempted to reduce them to absurdity by
showing that they led to an anthropomorphic view of God—which
Middle Platonists rejected. Thus, it is clear that both Theophilus and
the Middle Platonists had a common nonanthropomorphic concept
of God; they differed over a concept of matter that they believed was
necessitated by a view of God as absolutely immutable in the Platonic
sense. Whereas the biblical authors had thought of God as unchanging in character and commitment to justice, the Middle Platonists and
Theophilus thought of God as unchanging in a metaphysical sense.
Theophilus argued:
Plato and those of his school agree that God is ungenerated and the father and maker of all. Then, they suppose
matter is divine and ungenerated and they say that it was
flourishing with God. If God is ungenerated and all matter is ungenerated, no longer is God the maker of all as the
Platonists say, neither is the sovereignty of God shown, by
their own account. Further, just as God is changeless because
he is ungenerated, so also, if matter is also ungenerated, it is
also changeless and equal to God. For that which is generated
is mutable and changeable. The unregenerated is immutable
and unchangeable.
For how is it great, if God made the cosmos from subject
matter? For even the human artisan when he receives matter
from someone, can make what he wants from it. The power of God is made manifest in this, that he made what he wanted
from the non-existent (ἐξ οὐκ ὄντων).116
Theophilus’s use of the expression ἐξ οὐκ ὄντων expressed rejection of the idea that matter is in any sense eternal. It is a clear expression of creatio ex nihilo. Theophilus thought that the notion of creatio
ex nihilo was necessary to adopt for three reasons. First, if God were
limited to creating by organizing matter in the same way as humans,
then the way in which God manifests his power would not be unique.
Such a view of creation was contrary to a principle adopted by Middle
Platonists themselves that God is not anthropomorphic. The Middle
Platonists had adopted a program of ridiculing the common anthropomorphic view of God expressed in the poetic and popular writings
of the Greeks.117 Theophilus argued that the common view of God
that both he and the Middle Platonists adopted entailed the view that
God cannot create in the same manner as mere humans by organizing
already existing matter; rather, God’s mode of creation must be utterly
different and unique.118 Theophilus had thoroughly imbibed the
Middle Platonic view of God, for he argued that God is “ineffable . . .
inexpressible . . . uncontainable . . . incomprehensible . . . inconceivable
. . . incomparable . . . unteachable . . . immutable . . . inexpressible . . .
without beginning because he was uncreated, immutable because he
is immortal.”119 Theophilus backed this argument for creatio ex nihilo
with another common argument adopted by the Middle Platonists,
that God must be self-sufficient:
And first they [the prophets] taught us in harmony that
he made all things from non being [ἐξ οὐκ ὄντων τὰ πάντα
ἐποίησεν], for nothing is as ancient as God, but he is his own locus and without need and existing before the ages, he wished
to make the human so that he would be known by him. For
him he prepared the cosmos. For the generated is needy, the
ungenerated needs nothing.120
Second, Theophilus argued that God would not be the creator of all
things if some things existed without God’s having created them. Yet
if God were not creator of all, then the divine monarchy (μοναρχία)
would not be preserved. Thus God’s omnipotence required creation
out of absolute nothing. Given the Middle Platonist view of matter as
something evil and recalcitrant, it was unthinkable that God’s power
could be so limited as to require matter from which to create. I have
argued elsewhere that such a position is not necessary to all views of
God’s relation to eternal matter, for the Latter-day Saint concept of
uncreated matter in particular does not adopt the view that matter
is either inherently evil or recalcitrant; rather, in the Latter-day Saint
view, matter is entirely subject to God for any expression of its causal
and lawlike properties.121 Of course, such a view of uncreated matter
wholly subject to God was quite foreign to Theophilus and the Middle
Platonists.
Third, Theophilus argued that matter cannot be eternal because
what is eternal must be immutable in the Platonic sense, and matter is
subject to change. In the Platonic view, what is real and eternal is absolute and unchanging in every respect, and those things that change are
real only to the extent that they participate in these unchanging ideas
or forms. In effect, Theophilus’s reasons for adopting the new doctrine
of creatio ex nihilo were based on his adoption of the Middle Platonic
view of God, which was also a radical innovation in Christianity—a
God who is seen as immutable, self-sufficient, and utterly unlike
humans in every respect. Platonists, both Middle and Neo-, assumed
as a given fact the view that humans inhabit the lowest realm of reality, furthest from the one ground of actual being. Only God inhabited this ideal realm. Thus, anything embodied was not pure and real. 
Christians had been repeatedly attacked by Platonists for their childish view of a God who could be embodied and could change in this
realm of crass matter, so far removed from the pure realm of being.
Hubler concludes his discussion of Theophilus by writing:
Theophilus used the Platonist doctrine of God not only
to attack their view of matter but to develop a new view. In
choosing the Middle-Platonist doctrine of God over their view
of nature, he left nature entirely subject to God. As a result,
although his doctrine is Middle-Platonist in its expression, it
is steadfastly non–Middle Platonic in its outcome, both in its
monism and in the radical dependence of nature upon God.
Theophilus foreshadows the coming of monism to Platonist
philosophy in the next century in the work of Plotinus.122
Of course, Theophilus’s resolution of the problems posed by Middle
Platonic philosophy created additional problems for Christian theology. Because it reinterpreted the biblical concept of creation within
the scope of a Middle Platonic view of God, the new concept generated all kinds of new problems about how God was described in the
biblical documents—but that issue was not addressed by Theophilus
and had to wait for Origen and Augustine, who created a thoroughly
Neoplatonic view of God within the Christian tradition.123 As May
concludes:
Theophilus did not of course fully realise what a radical break
with the theological tradition the doctrine of creatio ex nihilo
constituted. He can even himself still talk of creation out of
nothing in the older undifferentiated sense: as a proof of the
possibility of the resurrection he points out that God created
man out of nothing, in that he formed him from a tiny drop of
seed which did not exist before. Theophilus takes no account
of the question whether in that case one can talk of a creatio
ex nihilo in the real sense at all. He simply wants to exalt the miraculous factor in the process of begetting and developing
human beings, while in his statements about the creation of
the world out of nothing the decisive factor is the idea of absolute unconditionality.124
The doctrine of creatio ex nihilo found its most developed formulation among early Christians of the late second century in the writings of Irenaeus, bishop of Lyon. Irenaeus battled the gnostic myths
that had infiltrated Christianity almost since its beginning. However,
Irenaeus himself had been influenced by the very philosophies he battled. May describes the situation: “Irenaeus is a clear thinker and by no
means uneducated. His concept of God is, like that of the Apologists,
strongly marked with popular philosophical ideas. God is unoriginate, eternal, needs nothing, is self-sufficient, and confers existence
on everything that is. . . . As the Unoriginate he stands over against
every originate being.”125 Irenaeus also taught that God is simple in
the sense that one cannot divide his being into a series of effects that
proceed from another—a doctrine that marked the simplicity of God
in the then-emerging precepts of Neoplatonism:
For He is Himself uncreated, both without beginning and
end, and lacking nothing. He is Himself sufficient for Himself; and still further, He grants to all others this very thing,
existence; but the things which have been made by him have
received a beginning. But whatsoever things had a beginning,
and are liable to dissolution, and are subject to and stand in
need of Him who made them, must necessarily in all respects
have a different term [applied to them] . . . so that He indeed
who made all things can alone, together with His Word, properly be termed God and Lord: but the things which have been
made cannot have this term applied to them, neither should
they justly assume that appellation which belongs to the
Creator.126
Elsewhere, Irenaeus claimed: “While men, indeed, cannot make
anything out of nothing, but only out of matter already existing, yet
God is in this point preeminently superior to men, that He Himself
called into being the substance of His creation, when previously it
had no existence.”127 The same argument, claiming that God’s mode
of creation must be unique and utterly unlike human modes of creation, had been used by Theophilus. This doctrine created problems
for Irenaeus’s soteriology (theory of salvation), which taught that salvation consisted in persons becoming perfect like God and, indeed,
gods themselves: “For we cast blame upon Him, because we have not
been made gods from the beginning, but at first merely men, then at
length gods.”128 He explained that “God had power at the beginning to
grant perfection to man; but as the latter was only recently created, he
could not possibly have received it, or even if he had received it, could
he have contained it, or containing it, could he have retained it.”129 But
it then appears that God cannot, after all, create persons perfect and
must be responsible for having created something imperfect. However,
Irenaeus argued that even though God can create man perfect; he nevertheless cannot create man capable of accepting perfection because
man is only recently created: “For from the very fact of these things
having been created, [it follows] that they are not uncreated; but by
their continuing in being throughout a long course of ages, they shall
receive a faculty of the Uncreated, through the gratuitous bestowal of
eternal existence upon them by God.”130 Irenaeus thus claims that God
will bestow the “faculty of the Uncreated” on humans, even though
they are created. Yet Irenaeus’s claim here seems simply incoherent,
for God cannot give the status of being uncreated to created things.
Nor can God create man with the capacity for perfection and deification if what he creates is incapable of receiving perfection, when it is
given, because of man’s status as a contingent creature. In the end, being gods and divine means nothing more for Ireneaus than becoming immortal through resurrection.
Of course, the tension between the doctrine of creatio ex nihilo
and the view that human nature must be created became the central
issue only later, during the Arian dispute. Arius held that Christ, as
a begotten son, must have been a created being and thus ontologically contingent in his being, whereas the Father was uncreated, or
ontologically necessary. Thus, the divide between creator and creature
became so pronounced that it is logically impossible that they both
be found in the same person, Christ. I have argued elsewhere that the
attempt to resolve this basic logical contradiction at the very center of
creedal beliefs is not resolved by the two-nature theory of Christology
adopted at Chalcedon in ad 421.131 This central dispute also divides
creedalists from Latter-day Saints, for it is precisely this ontological
gulf between creator and created that makes it impossible for creedalists to accept the early Christian doctrine that we, mere humans, can
nevertheless “be partakers of the divine nature,” as 2 Peter 1:4 KJV
affirms. It is the central conundrum that plagued Irenaeus’s theology,
which also shows why the doctrine of creatio ex nihilo is pivotal to
theological and philosophical issues dividing Latter-day Saints from
conservative Protestants like Copan and Craig.
The apologists of the late second century adopted creatio ex nihilo
primarily because it was required by the Middle Platonic view of God,
which they had also adopted. They were quite correct to point out
that God, as conceived by the Middle Platonists, had to be completely
independent of the world and stand over against it. But this is not a
Christian view of God that they are defending. Rather, it is the adoption of the God of Greek philosophy that required them to modify
the biblical doctrine of creation so radically. The eminent historian
Robert Wilken notes:
Since the time when the Apologists first began to offer a reasoned and philosophical presentation of Christianity to
pagan intellectuals, Christian thinkers had claimed that they worshipped the same God honored by the Greeks and Romans,
in other words, the deity adored by other reasonable men and
women. Indeed, Christians adopted precisely the same language to describe God as did pagan intellectuals. The Christian
apologist Theophilus of Antioch described God as “ineffable . . .
inexpressible . . . uncontainable . . . incomprehensible . . . inconceivable . . . incomparable . . . unteachable . . . immutable . . .
inexpressible . . . without beginning because he was uncreated,
immutable because he is immortal.” This view, that God was
an immaterial, timeless, and impassible divine being, who is
known through the mind alone, became a keystone of Christian
apologetics, for it served to establish a decisive link to the Greek
spiritual and intellectual tradition.132
The doctrine of creatio ex nihilo followed from the adoption of
the Middle Platonic view of God’s transcendence of the created order.
It was the doctrine of God that, above all, heralded the shift from the
biblical view of God, whom persons may encounter in sacred experience, to the God of the philosophers, who is grasped by reason alone.
Hatch summarized the difference between the transcendent God of
the Middle Platonists and the God of faith:
From the earliest Christian teaching, indeed, the conception of the transcendence of God is absent. God is near to
men and speaks to them: He is angry with them and punishes
them: He is merciful to them and pardons them. He does all
this through His angels and prophets, and last of all through
His Son. But he needs such mediators rather because a heavenly Being is invisible, than because He is transcendent. . . .
There was no taste for metaphysical discussion: there was possibly no appreciation of metaphysical conceptions.133
Tertullian, writing near the beginning of the third century, also
adopted the dogma of creatio ex nihilo. Employing an argument that 
was later adopted by Augustine and still later by Aquinas, albeit in a
different form, Tertullian reasoned that the idea of creatio ex nihilo
followed from God’s unconditioned power: “He cannot be known as
God and be called Almighty, save that He is no longer almighty, if His
might did not extend to this also—to produce all things out of nothing! . . . He cannot say that it was as its Lord that God made use of
matter for the work of <creating> the world, for He could not be Lord
of a substance which was coequal with Himself.”134
It was this argument that won the day for creatio ex nihilo more
than anything else. I think that the earliest Christians would not have
been open to the notion of creatio ex nihilo if it had not captured at
least a flavor of the biblical doctrine of creation and God’s power. This
new doctrine embodied the sense that God was completely sovereign
in every respect. Nothing could oppose him. There is no threat of a
primeval chaos rushing into God’s creation from above the vault or
firmament that God had created, as appeared in Genesis 1:6–8. There
is no sense that God consulted with other divine beings in the creation, as in Genesis 1:26–27 and Psalm 82. There is no sense that God
might confront a real evil that he could not simply wipe out at will,
at any time he wanted. Yet even this sense of unconditioned power
gave rise to philosophical questions regarding the compatibility of the
existence of such a God with the reality of evil—questions that would
not be addressed until the time of Origen and that remain unresolved
within the creedal tradition even today. If God can wipe out any real
evil at will, then anything we take to be evil is, in reality, all for the
greater good because whatever truly exists is good. Evil, then, cannot
be real. For this reason, Augustine argued that what we take to be evil
is not real being; it is merely the privation or lack of being. Thus evil in
this life is like everything we experience within the Platonic tradition:
a mere appearance and not really real.
In addition to the problem of evil that this doctrine of creatio
ex nihilo renders so stark and unfathomable, there is the question of whether God must create out of nothing to be considered almighty. I
have contended elsewhere that this argument based on God’s omnipotent power is not sound, for the reason that God need not be able to
alter the past to be considered omnipotent.135 One cannot reasonably
argue, as Tertullian tried to do, from the definition of omnipotence
to rule out the possibility that matter is eternal in the sense that it has
always existed.
Conclusion
I believe that we can conclude quite confidently that Copan and
Craig have seriously misunderstood the evidence that they present
in support of creation ex nihilo. Based on the evidence that I have
reviewed, the following conclusions seem warranted:
1. The New Testament does not teach creation ex nihilo. On the
contrary, 2 Peter 3:5–6 expressly teaches that God created out of the
already existing chaotic waters, Hebrews 11:3 expressly teaches that
God created the visible world from the already existing invisible world,
and Romans 4:17 teaches that God created from an already existing
substrate.
2. The claim made by Copan and Craig that the dogma of creatio ex nihilo was already well established in the Jewish texts about
the time of Christ is simply false. None of the texts they cite for this
conclusion addresses the doctrine of creation out of nothing. Indeed,
some of the Jewish texts that they claim teach creatio ex nihilo, such as 2 Enoch and Joseph and Aseneth, expressly teach that God created
the world by making visible those invisible things that already existed.
In addition, none of the Christian texts cited by Copan and Craig,
such as the Shepherd of Hermas and the Odes of Solomon, actually
teach creatio ex nihilo. Indeed, these texts better exemplify the doctrine of creatio ex materia. Further, it is clear that several Jewish texts
from around the time of Christ, such as the writings of Philo Judaeus
and the Wisdom of Solomon, as well as several early Christian writers
such as Clement, Justin Martyr, and Athenagoras, expressly teach the
doctrine of creatio ex materia.
3. The doctrine of creatio ex nihilo seems to appear rather suddenly about ad 180 in the writings of Tatian and Theophilus in their
arguments with Stoics and Middle Platonists. It is fairly clear that it
arose as a philosophical consequence of their adoption of a Middle
Platonic concept of God. What we see in all texts from about ad 165
and after is that Platonic philosophy, both Middle and Neo-, had infiltrated Christian thought and become a basis for major innovations in
doctrine. Latter-day Saints see this as the apostasy in action, in living color. The personal God of the Bible, known through revelation
and personal encounter, is suddenly too far removed from the human
sphere of existence to be involved in such things as interactions with
humans. The notion that humans are created in the image and likeness of God must be reinterpreted to fit the Platonic view that God is
utterly unique and entirely unlike humans. God’s mode of creation,
therefore, must be completely different from any human mode of creation. The Middle Platonic assumption that only the absolutely immutable can be eternal is used as a background assumption to argue that
matter cannot in any sense be eternal because it is subject to change.
The Middle Platonic view that matter necessarily entails an eternal
cycle of recurrence leads to adopting a view of God that altogether
transcends the material sphere. If one accepts the assumptions from
which the Christian apologists of the late second century begin, then
creatio ex nihilo becomes the only logical conclusion. It apparently
never occurred to them to reject these Platonist assumptions. The adoption of the doctrine of creatio ex nihilo had other farreaching implications for the history and form of “Christian” theology, extending even to our own day. The doctrine of creation out of
nothing led inevitably to the Council of Chalcedon, in which Christ
was described as one person having two natures, consubstantial with
the Father in his deity. This two-nature theory of Christology assured
that the Platonic view of natures and substance would be essential to
make “sense” of the doctrine of God within the creedal tradition. The
doctrine of creatio ex nihilo also gave rise, and continues to give rise,
to arguments that everything that occurs must be caused by God, for
if he did not cause each substance to exist anew in each moment, it
would cease to exist. Thus, a very strong form of divine determinism
and predestination seems to be entailed by the doctrine—though a
thorough discussion of these issues would take me far afield from the
purpose of this essay.
It seems to me, therefore, that Copan and Craig have overstated
their case. They speak in their essay and book as if anyone who disagrees with them is simply in error and ignorant of the facts, heedless of the overwhelming number of respected scholars who do in fact
disagree. They give a false impression of the evidence and fail even to
note the necessary distinctions between absolute negation of existence
and relative non-being that are necessary to make sense of the texts in
the postbiblical era. All in all, their argument for creatio ex nihilo as
the universally accepted doctrine of early Christians simply does not
withstand scrutiny.