Out of Nothing:
A History of Creation ex Nihilo
in Early Christian Thought
I
n their contribution to The New Mormon Challenge entitled
“Craftsman or Creator? An Examination of the Mormon Doctrine
of Creation and a Defense of Creatio ex nihilo,” Paul Copan and
William Lane Craig assert, among other things, that the notion of
creation ex nihilo—creation out of nothing—is biblical.1
 For good measure, they also assert that this doctrine was not an invention of
the philosophers but has always been the well-established “Christian”
belief. In so doing, they argue against the vast majority of biblical and
classical scholars. I contend that their arguments on these points are
seriously flawed, that there are compelling reasons to support the view
of the majority of biblical scholars that the Bible teaches creation out
of a preexisting chaos, that Copan and Craig have seriously misrepresented the biblical data to read into it their doctrine of absolutist
creation, and that their argument that the doctrine of creation ex
nihilo was not a philosophical development is uninformed and fails
to grasp the essential distinctions necessary to make sense of the doctrine as it developed in patristic theology. I present good reasons why
the vast majority of scholars agree that the doctrine of creatio ex nihilo
was first formulated around ad 200 in arguments with the Gnostics,
Stoics, and Middle Platonists.
In both publications being reviewed here, Copan and Craig deal
with texts from the Old Testament, philosophical arguments from the
supposed impossibility of the actual infinite, and evidence from big
bang cosmology that they argue supports creation out of nothing. In
this review I will focus only on the New Testament and the rise of the
doctrine of creatio ex nihilo in first- and second-century Christianity.
I will review their article in The New Mormon Challenge, as well as
their recently published book Creation out of Nothing: A Biblical,
Philosophical, and Scientific Exploration, which expands upon their
article. I have chosen to review the book together with the article for
two reasons. First, the book plugs many gaping holes that exist in the
article, and it does no good to respond to a weaker argument when
a stronger argument has been made. Second, I believe that dialogue
among Latter-day Saints and evangelicals calls for charity—even
when the evangelicals do not reciprocate that charity.
There is a central problem with these works by Copan and Craig.
They make no bones about the fact that they are not engaging in an
attempt to provide a balanced exegesis of the scriptures and documents
that they discuss. Rather, their article and book are like a lawyer’s defense brief for the view that the scriptures teach creatio ex nihilo.2
A careful reading reveals that they are presenting their case as if they
were debaters with no interest in giving a balanced assessment of the
evidence. Such a debater’s stance is easily discerned in their defensive
position that “even if” the evidence did not support creation out of
nothing, still their position dictates that we should read the texts as
teaching that doctrine. To defend their position, they explicitly adopt
a prior theological commitment that determines what the evidence
must show: “And even if, as many of [the Jewish and Christian writers] believed, God did create out of primordial matter, these Jewish
and Christian thinkers held that this matter itself was first created by
God and then at a later stage shaped by him into an orderly cosmos.
They uniformly held that God alone is unbegotten and uncreated;
everything else is begotten and creaturely” (Creation out of Nothing
[CON], p. 27, emphasis in original). This passage displays clearly the
two key assumptions that dictate the outcome of discussion by Copan
and Craig: (1) the word create is assumed to mean creation ex nihilo;
and (2) even if a text says that God created by organizing unorganized
matter, we must still see the text as teaching creatio ex nihilo because
implicitly it adopts the view that God first “created” everything out of
nothing. While I doubt that there is such a thing as a presuppositionless or “objective” stance in reading texts, nevertheless, their attempt
to defend the doctrine of creatio ex nihilo is vitiated by the fact that
the texts do not support their view unless these two assumptions are
adopted. Yet these very assumptions are themselves what is at issue.
Thus the basic premise of their discussion begs the question in their
favor and often causes them to ignore more convincing readings of the key texts. They cite several texts that do not discuss how God created,
but merely that he did, and Copan and Craig argue that the text must
mean creation out of nothing even though they admit that the text
doesn’t expressly address the issue as to how God created because it is
supposedly “implicit” in the text.
Creation as Described in the New Testament
Copan and Craig contend that Joseph Smith’s reading of Genesis
1—that it expressly teaches creation from a prior chaos—is contrary
to the biblical text. However, it is Joseph Smith’s interpretation that
enjoys the support of the majority of biblical scholars.3
 Copan and
Craig also assert that several passages of the New Testament expressly
teach creatio ex nihilo. In so arguing they once again swim against the
tide of contrary conclusions reached by the vast majority of scholars
who have treated this issue.
2 Peter 3:5–6. Several New Testament passages are cited by Copan
and Craig that supposedly support creation out of nothing. Their
treatment of 2 Peter 3:5 is typical of the way they force the text with
assumptions contrary to the text throughout their book (see The New
Mormon Challenge [NMC], p. 427 n. 136, and CON, pp. 87–91). Second
Peter 3:5–6 presents a New Testament text that clearly refers back to
an Old Testament teaching that God created the heaven and the earth
by organizing preexistent chaos. Genesis 1:1–2 states: “In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth, and the earth was without
form, and void; and darkness was upon the face of the deep. And the
Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters” (Genesis 1:2 King
James Version [KJV]). The waters represented the primordial chaos
already present when God created the earth in Genesis 1:2 (and there is no indication in the text that the waters are ever created). In fact, the
scripture in 2 Peter seems to have been directed to people like Copan
and Craig: “They [sarcastic scoffers] deliberately ignore the fact that
long ago there were the heavens and the earth, formed out of water
and through water by the Word of God, and that it was through these
same factors that the world of those days was destroyed by the floodwaters” (2 Peter 3:5–6 New Jerusalem Bible [NJB]). This text rather
clearly teaches the creation of heaven and earth by verbal fiat out of
waters that existed before the heavens and the earth and that this preexisting chaos eventually provided the water for the great flood. In
essence, the flood represents a return of the world to chaos because the
people that God had created had not obeyed his commands.4
There are five crucial points in 2 Peter 3:5 that support the view
that the author of this scriptural passage believed that everything was
organized from a preexisting chaos. First, the text addresses the formation of “heaven and earth,” or all that is said to be created by God
in Genesis 1:1–2. Indeed, the parallel with Genesis 1:1 is unmistakable
and clearly signifies that 2 Peter speaks of the same creation spoken
of there. Second, the heaven and earth are said in 2 Peter 3:5 to be
formed εξ υδατος και δι’ υδατος (ex hydatos kai di hydatos), both
“out of water” and also “through water.” The double reference to water
as the material substrate used in creation “out of” and “from” which
the heaven and earth are formed appears to be an intentional emphasis. Third, the fact that we are dealing with the entire scope of creation
is indicated by reference to God’s Word as the power by which the
heaven and earth are formed from water—τῷ του θεου λογῳ (tō tou
theou logō). The text is referring to Genesis 1:1–2, which states that
God spoke and heaven and earth were created, and also to John 1:1,
which mentions that God creates all that there is by the power of his
Word. Fourth, the heaven and earth are formed from water, which is
recognized in the very next verse as the principle of chaos causing the
flood or the deep in Genesis 1:2. The earth was created from water, and it was destroyed by water through the flood because water represents the unformed and chaotic—the deep that is never said to be
created in the Genesis account of creation but is presented as already
present at the time God undertakes to create the heaven and the earth.
Fifth, the verb used in 2 Peter 3:5, συνεστῶσα (synestōsa), is a form
of the verb συνίστημι (synistēmi), meaning to organize by combining
together and not by creating out of nothing.5
In an endnote to their article, Copan and Craig claim that in
2 Peter 3:5 there is a “two-step” creation, with an initial creation
ex nihilo and a second creation from chaotic water. They claim that
2 Peter 3:5 “focuses on the second stage” dealing with creation by
chaos (NMC, p. 427 n. 136). However, their ad hoc explanation consists of imposing an assumption on the text for which there is no textual support at all. Second Peter 3:5 gives no indication of any prior
creation ex nihilo. This interpretation is a good example of how Copan
and Craig are willing to gerrymander texts and read into them their
own theological demands in a way that is contrary to the text. They
admit that many biblical scholars, such as J. N. D. Kelly and evangical
Richard Bauckham, interpret this text to teach precisely that water is
the “sole original existent” and the “elemental stuff out of which the
universe was formed” as the Greek philosopher Thales had taught (and
as Genesis 1 presupposes in equating the “deep” or the waters with the
uncreated chaos).6
 This is where their prior theological assumption
supposedly comes to their rescue. The fact that the text says absolutely
nothing about some prior creation of water from nothing doesn’t deter
Copan and Craig from seeing this belief as the key to interpreting the
text. In their book they assert:
This would imply a two-step creation process (already
noted in the previous chapter) involving God’s creating the
universe and its elements. This is supported by the fact that
the verb “formed [synestōsa]” is used rather than the verb ktizein (create). In Proverbs 8:24, we read that “the deep” did
not always exist. God creates the waters and then uses them
in the process of creation. Thus, water is the material from
which the sky is created and instrument (dia) to create the sky.
(CON, p. 88, brackets and emphasis in original)
So Copan and Craig suggest that the statement in 2 Peter 3:5 that
God created “the heaven and earth” by “forming” them out of water
really means that God first created water out of nothing and that he
then used that water to create the “heavens and the earth.” They cite
Proverbs 8:24 as a supposed instance of such creation of water out of
nothing and then using that water to create the earth. Their eisegesis of Proverbs, however, is no more convincing than their attempt
to read creation out of nothing into a text that teaches creation out of
chaos. Proverbs doesn’t teach that God created the waters or “deep”
out of nothing; rather, it expressly states that before God created
the earth and thus before there was water anywhere on earth, God
“prepared the heavens” and he organized the waters not by “creating” them, but by setting “a compass upon the face of the depth”—
and this before he created the earth (Proverbs 8:26–27). “While
as yet he had not made the earth. . . . When he prepared the heavens, I was there: when he set a compass upon the face of the depth”
.(עד־לא עשה ארץ וחוצות . . . בהכינו שמים שם אני בחקו חוג על־פני תהום)
Thus, the waters are never said to be created in Proverbs 8 (or
anywhere else in the Old Testament for that matter), contrary to
the assertion by Copan and Craig. Rather, God prepares the already
existent waters by organizing them through the process of measuring them and plumbing their depths. The verb used in Proverbs 16:12
and translated as “prepared,” יכון) yikkôn), indicates a preparation
and establishing of something already existent and mirrors the statement in 2 Peter that “the heavens and earth were formed out of water”
(author’s translation).
Hebrews 11:3. Copan and Craig next turn to Hebrews 11:3, which
says in the KJV: “Through faith we understand that the worlds were
framed by the word of God, so that things which are seen were not
made of things which do appear.” According to another translation of the same passage: “It is by faith that we understand that the ages
were created by a word from God, so that from the invisible the visible
world came to be” (NJB). What this text says is that God created visible
things literally “from” invisible things (εἰς τὸ μὴ ἐκ ϕαινομένων τὸ
βλεπόμενον). But the invisible things are not nothing; they already
exist. Copan and Craig wrongly assume that invisible things can be
equated with absolute nothing. They cite Paul Ellingworth in arguing that creation of the world by the “word” of God “would ‘conflict’
with any idea that the visible world was made out of materials in the
invisible world” (NMC, p. 116).7
 However, 2 Peter 3:5–6 teaches that
God created from the waters by his word or command. The notion that
creation by God’s command or word must assume creation ex nihilo
is simply false. Moreover, Hebrews 11:3 states that the worlds were
“framed by the word of God,” not that they were created out of nothing. The verb used here, καταρτίζω (katartizō) refers to organizing,
framing, or putting together what is not yet organized or to mend,
repair, or put in order something that has become disorganized.8
Citing William Lane, Copan and Craig also argue that the reference to those “things which are not seen” teaches creatio ex nihilo
because it “denies that the creative universe originated from primal
material or anything observable” (NMC, p. 116).9
 Yet this is simply
argument by assertion without any evidence or reasoning to back
it up. Moreover, it is demonstrably wrong. For example, Copan and
Craig also cite 2 Enoch (a document very likely dating to about ad
70–100 and thus contemporaneous with New Testament texts such
as Hebrews and probably the Gospel of Matthew),10 which uses very
similar language about God’s command and things visible created
from the invisible. Arguing that this text too “reflects the doctrine of creation out of nothing” in a couple of places, they cite 2 Enoch 25:1–2
as follows: “I commanded . . . that visible things should come down
from invisible” (NMC, pp. 123–24). However, the entire relevant text
reads: “Before anything existed at all, from the very beginning, whatever exists I created from the non-existent, and from the invisible the
visible. . . . For, before any visible things had come into existence, I, the
ONE, moved around in the invisible things, like the sun, from east to
west and from west to east.”11
It is also well known that the Septuagint (LXX) translates the text
of Genesis 1:2 referring to the “desolate and empty” (ובהו תהו (world
in its precreation state as ἀόρατος καὶ ἀκατασκεύαστος—which
means “invisible and unformed.” This same word invisible is similar
to Hebrews 11:3 μὴ ἐκ ϕαινομένων (mē ek phainomenōn), meaning
“out of unseen things” the world was created. However, just as in LXX
Genesis the unformed and lifeless world that is invisible or unseen
is not “nothing at all” but, rather, chaotic and unformed matter that
cannot be seen because it does not yet have form impressed upon it
by God.12
In the context of 2 Enoch, it is clear that the “invisible things” are
not absolute nothing; rather, they are things that are not visible to
mortal eyes. That these invisible things already exist in some sense is
demonstrated by the fact that God moves among them. The translator
F. I. Andersen explains: “The impression remains that God was not
the only existent being or thing from the very first. . . . God made the
existent out of the non-existent, the visible out of the non-visible. So
the invisible things coexisted with God before he began to make anything. . . . Vs. 4 is quite explicit on this point: Before any of the visible
things had come into existence, God was moving around among the
invisible things.”13 Not only does this text not teach creatio ex nihilo, but it teaches the very opposite. This reading of “invisible things” as
already existing realities is also very strongly supported by Romans
1:19–20 KJV: “Because that which may be known of God is manifest in
them; for God hath shewed it unto them. For the invisible things of him
from the creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood by
the things that are made, even his eternal power.” Note that the invisible things already exist and can be seen through the power of God.
This scripture fits well with the Latter-day Saint view that before God
created the earth out of matter that is visible to us, he had already created a world out of spirit that is not visible to us (see Moses 6:36). This
same view is expressed in Hebrews—things that are not visible or are
unseen are still things that already exist. As James N. Hubler observes
in his excellent doctoral dissertation on the emergence of the idea of
creatio ex nihilo: “the notion of creation μὴ ἐκ ϕαινομένων was comfortable for Platonic dualists or Stoics, because it lacked all qualities.”14
In other words, both the Platonic dualists and the Stoics could easily
see the reference to “things invisible” as a type of formless matter that
lacks any qualities of individuation but is matter nonetheless.
The view that the “invisible things” are not absolute nothing is
also supported by Colossians 1:16–17:
For in him were created all things
in heaven and on earth:
everything visible and everything invisible,
thrones, ruling forces, sovereignties, powers—
all things were created through him and for him.
He exists before all things. (NJB)
In this scripture it seems fairly evident that the “everything invisible” includes things that already exist in heaven, such as thrones,
dominions, principalities, and powers. Further, the invisible things
are also created by God; yet the fact that they are invisible means only
that they are not seen by mortal eyes, not that they do not exist. The reference to invisible things does not address whether they were made
out of preexisting matter. However, 2 Corinthians 4:18 states that “the
things which are seen are temporal; but the things which are not seen
are eternal” (KJV). It is not difficult to see that Hebrews 11:3 neither
expressly mentions creation out of nothing nor implicitly assumes it.
The argument that the text must somehow implicitly assume creation
of out nothing misinterprets the text and forces it with assumptions
that are contrary to the meaning of “invisible things.” If anything,
Hebrews 11:3 implicitly assumes creation of the earth out of a preexisting substrate not visible to us.
Romans 4:17. Copan and Craig next cite Romans 4:17 KJV: “even
God, who quickeneth the dead, and calleth those things which be not
as though they were (καλοῦντος τὰ μὴ οντα ὡς οντα).” There are
two possible translations of Romans 4:17. The majority translation
does not entail creation out of nothing: “[Abraham] is our father in
the presence of God whom he believed—the God who makes the dead
alive and summons the things that do not yet exist as though they
already do.”15 Another translation indicates that God “calls into existence the things which do not exist” (New American Bible, NAB). The
first translation is preferred for several reasons. First, Keith Norman
has pointed out that it is contradictory for God to call to that which
does not exist.16 Second, as Moo stated, “this interpretation fits the
immediate context better than a reference to God’s creative power,
for it explains the assurance with which God can speak of the ‘many
nations’ that will be descended from Abraham.”17 Thus, the preferred translation merely states that God summons the future reality of the
resurrection as if it already existed. This seems to me to be a far better
fit with the context.
Third, as Hubler comments: “The verse’s ‘non-existent’ need not
be understood in an absolute sense of non-being. μὴ οντα (mē onta)
refers to the previous non-existence of those things which are now
brought into existence. There is no direct reference to the absence or
presence of a material cause.”18 In other words, the Greek text suggests the view that God has brought about a thing that did not exist as
that thing before it was so created. For example, this use of μὴ οντα
is logically consistent with the proposition that “God called forth the
earth when before that the earth did not exist.” However, the fact that
the earth did not exist as the earth before it was so created does not
address the type of material that was used to make it.
Note also that Romans 4:17 uses the negative μή, which refers to
merely relative nonbeing and not to absolute nothing, as required by
the doctrine of creation ex nihilo. At this point it is important to understand a bit about the ancient concept of matter in the Greek-speaking
world and the distinction between relative nonbeing (Greek μὴ οντα)
and absolute nothing (Greek οὐκ οντως). Platonic philosophy—both
Neoplatonism and Middle Platonism—posited the existence of an
eternal substratum that was material but was nevertheless so removed
from the One Ground of Being that it was often said to not have
“real” existence. As Jonathan Goldstein observes: “Platonists called
pre-existent matter ‘the non-existent.’”19 This relative nonexistence
is indicated by the Greek negative μή, meaning “not” or “non-,” in
conjunction with the word for existence or being.20 When the early
Christian theologians speak of creation that denies that there was any
material state prior to creation, however, they use the Greek negation ουκ, meaning “not in any way or mode.” As Henry Chadwick
explained the usage in Clement’s Stromata: “In each case the phrase he employs is ek me ontos not ex ouk ontos; that is to say, it is made
not from that which is absolutely non-existent, but from relative nonbeing or unformed matter, so shadowy and vague that it cannot be
said to have the status of ‘being’, which is imparted to it by the shaping hand of the Creator.”21 Edwin Hatch explained that, for Platonists,
“God was regarded as being outside the world. The world was in its
origin only potential being (το μὴ ον).”22 He explains more fully:
The [Platonic] dualistic hypothesis assumed a co-existence
of matter and God. The assumption was more frequently tacit
than explicit. . . . There was a universal belief that beneath the
qualities of all existing things lay a substratum or substance
on which they were grafted, and which gave to each thing its
unity. But the conception of the nature of this substance varied from that of gross and tangible material to that of empty
and formless space. . . . It was sometimes conceived as a vast
shapeless but plastic mass, to which the Creator gave form,
partly by moulding it as a potter moulds clay, partly by combining various elements as a builder combines his materials
in the construction of a house.23
Aristotle wrote that: “For generation is from non-existence (ἐκ
τοῦ μὴ οντος) into being, and corruption from being back into nonexistence (εἰς τὸ μὴ ον).”24 Generation is the act of a new animal
being derived from an existing one, or a plant deriving from an existing plant. It is new life from life. He used the phrase from non-existence
in a sense of relative nonbeing, where “things” do not yet exist and
there is only a formless substratum that has the potential or capacity to receive definite form. This substratum is not absolutely nothing
but is not yet a thing. It is “no-thing.” Thus, to say that God called to existence that which does not exist, as in Romans 4:17, actually
assumes a preexisting substrate that God, by impressing form upon it,
organizes into a thing that exists. Copan and Craig simply fail to note
this important distinction, and thus their exegesis is critically flawed.
In their book, Copan and Craig cite a number of evangelical
scholars who share their theological presuppositions and who opine
that this verse refers to creation out of nothing (CON, pp. 75–78). Yet
none of these authors provide any analysis or exegesis beyond asserting that the “non-existent” must mean that which does not exist in
any sense. For example, Copan and Craig quote James Dunn’s commentary on Romans 4:17, which reads in the relevant part: “‘As creator he creates without any precondition: he makes alive where there
was only death, and he calls into existence where there was nothing
at all. Consequently that which has been created, made alive in this
way, must be totally dependent on the creator, the life-giver, for its
very existence and life’” (NMC, p. 117).25 However, it is easy to see that
the scriptural analogy of God bringing the dead to life in the same
way that he creates “things which are not” does not support creatio ex
nihilo. Resurrection does not presuppose that the dead do not exist in
any way prior to their resurrection, nor does it presuppose that previously they did not have bodies that are reorganized through resurrection. Just as God does not create persons for the first time when he
restores them to life through resurrection, so God does not create out
of absolute nonbeing.
Moreover, note that Romans 4:17 doesn’t expressly address
whether things are created out of nothing or from some material substrate. It simply says that God “calls” things into existence that are
not. Moreover, such a statement in no way entails or requires creation
out of nothing implicitly. If I create a table then I create a table that
did not exist before I created it, but it doesn’t mean that I create it out
of nothing. In this text, the word create is not even used. Rather, what
God does is to “call forth” the non-existent. The verb καλέω means to call out loud to something, or to invite.26 It presupposes something
there to be called to or invited. God calls out to the non-existent by
his Word, an act described by a verb used elsewhere in Paul’s writings
(Romans 9:11; 1 Corinthians 12:3; Galatians 5:8; 1 Thessalonians 5:24).
Thus, the most natural reading of this text is that the “non-existent” or
μὴ οντα refers to a preexisting reality that does not yet exist as God
calls it to be. Such a reading has nothing to do with creation out of
absolute nothing.
John 1:3. Copan and Craig also argue that John 1:3 supports the
idea of creation out of nothing (here given in KJV): “All things were
made by him; and without him was not any thing made that was
made” (πάντα δι᾽ αὐτοῦ ἐγένετο, καὶ χωρὶς αὐτοῦ ἐγένετο οὐδὲ
ἕν ὃ γέγονεν). Copan and Craig assert of this verse: “The implication is that all things (which would include preexistent matter, if that
were applicable to the creative process) exist through God’s agent,
who is the originator of everything” (pp. 117–18). But this verse says
nothing about the creation of “preexistent matter.” One must assume
beforehand that the word create must mean to create ex nihilo in order
to arrive at this conclusion, for this verse says only that if something
was made, then it was made through the Word. It does not address
anything that may not have been made. More important, it does not
address how those things were made, its point being through whom
the creation was made. Anything that was made was made by Christ.
Since the translation one reviews is so critical to interpretation, I will
provide another translation: “All things came about through him and
without him not one thing came about, which came about.”27 The
question in this case is whether the final phrase which came about is
part of this verse or the beginning of the next verse. Hubler explains:
The punctuation of [John 1:3] becomes critical to its meaning. Proponents of creatio ex materia could easily qualify the
creatures of the Word to that “which came about,” excluding
matter. Proponents of creatio ex nihilo could place a period after “not one thing came about” and leave “which came
about” to the next sentence. The absence of a determinate tradition of punctuation in New Testament [Greek] texts leaves
room for both interpretations. Neither does creation by word
imply ex nihilo (contra Bultmann) as we have seen in Egypt,
Philo, and Midrash Rabba, and even in 2 Peter 3:5, where the
word functions to organize pre-cosmic matter.28
Of course, the reality of this text is that it does not consciously address
the issue of creation ex nihilo at all. It states who accomplished the
creation, not how it was done.29 A person who accepts creation from
chaos can easily say that no “thing” came about that is not a result of
the Word’s bringing it about but agree that there is a chaos in which
no “things” exist prior to their creation as such. Copan and Craig hang their hat on the connotations of the word πάντα, meaning “all” in an
inclusive sense. They argue that because “all” things that come about
are brought about by the Word, there is no possibility of an uncreated
reality that has not been brought about by God. However, the final
phrase, ἐγένετο οὐδὲ ἕν ὃ γέγονεν, translated “nothing made that
was made,” limits the scope of the creative power to the order of the
created and implies that whatever is not made was not made by him.
If it is created, he created it; if it is not, then it is not within the scope
of “what is made.”
Assessing New Testament Statements about Creation
Copan and Craig end their treatment of those New Testament
texts that, in their opinion, imply creatio ex nihilo with this charge:
In light of the above discussion, it is a serious distortion to
portray the doctrine of creation out of nothing as a purely
postbiblical phenomenon, as some Mormon apologists have
done. Where in the relevant scholarly references to which LDS
scholars point is there rigorous exegetical treatment of the relevant biblical passages on creation? The silence is deafening.
(NMC, p. 118, emphasis in original)
Such an assertion by Copan and Craig seems to be mere bravado.
Keith Norman and Stephen Ricks have provided at least an initial
start to such an exegesis, which I take up here.30 Even so, there is really
no need for Latter-day Saints to provide such an analysis at all because
it has already been provided by non-Mormon Christians who believe
that there is more justification for belief in a creation ex materia—and,
indeed, by some who accept the doctrine of creation ex nihilo but are
honest enough to admit that they cannot find such a doctrine in the
Bible.31 Hubler’s dissertation engages in a fairly rigorous exegesis of
the relevant biblical passages. He reaches a conclusion radically different from that of Copan and Craig: Several New Testament texts have been educed as evidence of creatio ex nihilo. None makes a clear statement
which would have been required to establish such an unprecedented position, or which we would need as evidence of such
a break with tradition. None is decisive and each could easily
by accepted by a proponent of creatio ex materia.32
Similarly, in his extensive study of the origin of the doctrine of
creatio ex nihilo in Christian thought, Gerhard May explains why he
does not believe that the New Testament texts can be taken to refer to
creatio ex nihilo.
The passages repeatedly quoted as New Testament witnesses for the idea of creatio ex nihilo are Romans 4:17, where
Paul says that God “calls into being the things that are not,”
and Hebrews 11:3, where it says that “the visible came forth
from the invisible.” But these formulations fit in with the
statements of Hellenistic Judaism . . . about the creation of
non-being, or out of non-being, and mean, no more than
those, to give expression to creation out of nothing, in the
strict sense, as a contradiction in principle of the doctrine of
world-formation.33
May explains that creatio ex nihilo is a metaphysical doctrine that
requires conscious formulation, and that such an approach was completely foreign to any of the biblical writers: “The biblical presentation
of the Almighty God who created the world . . . possessed for early
Christianity an overwhelming self-evidence and was not perceived as
a metaphysical problem. This new question first concerned the theologians of the second century, deeply rooted in philosophical thinking,
and wanting consciously to understand the truth of Christianity as
the truth of philosophy.”34
Hubler and May feel that a “rigorous” exegesis is not needed to
show that these biblical passages do not address the issue of creatio ex nihilo because it is fairly obvious on the face of such passages that
they do not consciously formulate such a metaphysical doctrine. The
argument that these texts must assume the doctrine of creation out
of nothing simply begs the question—especially where the text does
not address the issue and does not engage in the type of philosophical
analysis necessary to formulate the doctrine. Asserting that a view is
“implicit” in the text without explaining why the implication is necessary to the text amounts to simply reading one’s own view into the
text. I believe that is precisely what Copan and Craig have done. An
approach that resists reading creatio ex nihilo into the text unless it
is expressly formulated is especially appropriate because, as we shall
see, the earliest Christian philosophers assumed that the doctrine of
creation from preexisting chaos was the Christian view. The issue had
not been addressed or settled prior to the end of the second century,
when the adoption of a Middle Platonic view of God and matter as
a background assumption of discourse made adoption of creatio ex
nihilo the only rational doctrine to adopt.
Copan and Craig also assert that Latter-day Saints have failed to
address the biblical evidence:
One wonders what LDS scholars would take as unambiguous evidence for creation out of nothing in Scripture (or even
extrabiblical sources). It seems that they would not be satisfied with any formulation in a given text other than “creation
out of absolutely nothing” or the like before admitting to the
possibility of finding clear evidence of the doctrine of creatio
ex nihilo. Apart from the strong case just made for the biblical
doctrine of creation out of nothing, we must note that even if
the biblical evidence were ambiguous and the biblical writers
took no position on this issue, the LDS view would not win
by default. . . . On the one hand, Mormons have neglected to
interact with biblical scholarship on this subject; on the other,
they have put forth no significant positive exegetical evidence
for their own position. (NMC, p. 119)
Well, I can’t speak for other Latter-day Saint scholars, but what I
would like to see as “unambiguous evidence” in scripture of creatio ex
nihilo is evidence that truly is unambiguous and is not better explained
as teaching the contrary doctrine of creatio ex materia. I would like
to see a text that directly addresses the issue of creatio ex nihilo in a
conscious way and not a reading of the text that merely assumes the
doctrine of creatio ex nihilo. I would like to see a discussion of the biblical text that does not ignore the background assumptions of the world
out of which the text arises.
If a text is truly taking a polemical position, then it should make
clear that it is rejecting one position and espousing another. To see the
New Testament text as teaching creatio ex nihilo when it comes out
of a religious and cultural context that, up to that time, had universally accepted creatio ex materia requires that it actually formulate,
discuss, probe, and evaluate the kinds of philosophical distinctions
that underlie the doctrines in the first place. Not only do the New
Testament texts not make such distinctions consciously, but they in
fact show every evidence of maintaining the position prevalent within
their historical context.
So intent are Copan and Craig on reading creatio ex nihilo into
any text that says that God “created that which is from that which is
not” that they have blinded themselves to the many and genuinely
convincing textual and historical evidences for creatio ex materia.
They ignore the arguments in favor of seeing Genesis 1 and 2 Peter
3:5–6 as texts teaching creation out of chaos. They ignore the fact that
in the ancient world “invisible things” are still things that are simply
not seen. And finally, they ignore the work of fellow evangelicals, such
as Bruce K. Waltke and William R. Lane, who have already done a fine
job of arguing the very position that Latter-day Saints assert.35 These omissions have serious implications for the strength of the arguments
Copan and Craig propose.
