Creation as Described in Extrabiblical Texts
The Dead Sea Scrolls. Copan and Craig suggest that texts from the
Dead Sea Scrolls, produced around the time of Christ, assume creation
out of nothing (CON, pp. 105–7). For example, they quote the Rule of
the Congregation (1QSa) found among the scrolls: “From the God of
Knowledge comes all that is and shall be. Before ever they existed He
established their whole design, and when, as ordained for them, they
come into being, it is in accord with His glorious design that they
accomplish their task without change.”36 They also quote 1QS XI, 11:
By his knowledge everything shall come into being,
and all that does exist
he establishes with his calculations
and nothing is done outside of him. (NMC, p. 122)
They assert that in these texts they see an ex nihilo understanding of creation during this period (pp. 122–23). Such a reading forces
the text with assumptions that simply are not addressed in it. These
texts do not address whether God used prior material or how God created the earth. All the texts from the scrolls cited by Copan and Craig
address only the fact that God has predestined the course of the world
and has knowledge of all things before they occur. Nothing happens
without God having a knowledge before it happens or “comes to be.”
The mere assertions that God knew of something before he brought it
about and that he brought it about through his power are not inconsistent with creatio ex materia. Latter-day Saints believe that before
God created the earth he knew its whole design, that by his knowledge
he created all things that came into existence, and yet that he created
them by organizing a chaos. In other words, there is nothing asserted
in these texts that is inconsistent with what Latter-day Saints believe (except that they reject the all-pervasive predestination that the Dead
Sea covenanters believed in).
Rabbi Gamaliel. Copan and Craig next refer to a statement by the
first-century rabbi Gamaliel as support for creatio ex nihilo:
A philosopher asked Rabban Gamaliel, “Your God was
a great artist, but he found himself good materials which
helped him.” Rabban Gamaliel replied, “What are these?”
The philosopher said, “Chaos, darkness, waters, wind, and
depths” (see Genesis 1.2). Rabban Gamaliel replied, “May
the breath go forth from this man. It is written concerning
each of these. Concerning the creation of chaos, ‘Who made
peace and created evil’ (Isaiah 45:7). Concerning darkness,
‘Who formed the light and created darkness.’ Concerning the
waters, ‘Praise him, heavens and the waters, etc.’ (Psalm 148:4).
Why? Because, ‘He commanded and they were created’ (v. 8).
Concerning the wind, ‘For behold he forms the mountains
and creates the wind’ (Amos 4:13). Concerning the depths,
‘When the depths were not, I danced’” (Proverbs 8:24).37
However, Gamaliel does not adopt the doctrine of creatio ex nihilo.
David Winston and Hubler both argue that Gameliel denies that any
of these cosmic forces aided God in creation. He does not deny that
there was a passive material, merely that there was any material that
aided God in the construction of the cosmos.38 Hubler places this text
in the context of other rabbinic texts that strictly prohibit any speculation about what there may have been prior to the creation in Genesis.
In this context, it seems fairly evident that Gamaliel is actually teaching that God did not have any helpers in the creation—but, in good
rabbinic fashion, that he refuses to go beyond that principle and speculate about what might have existed before the creation. 
2 Enoch. Copan and Craig also argue that 2 Enoch (Slavonic, probably dating from the first century) teaches creation out of nothing. In
their book, they correct a critical mistake in their understanding of
2 Enoch in the article, where they argued that the assertion that God
made “the visible from the invisible” teaches creation out of nothing.
There they argue that what is invisible (as in Hebrews 10:3) is “nothing” and that 2 Enoch teaches that “visible things are created from
invisible things” (see NMC, p. 124). In their book, however, they recognize that it is clear that the invisible things are not “nothing” but
rather are things that exist, though unseen. Nevertheless, they extend
their argument to insist that 2 Enoch teaches a two-stage creation:
first the invisible things are created from nothing and then the visible things are created from the invisible things (CON, pp. 100–102).
Second Enoch 24:2 asserts: “Before anything at all existed, from the
very beginning, whatever exists I created from the non-existent, and
from the invisible the visible.” Thus, Copan and Craig claim that
2 Enoch teaches creation out of nothing.40
However, Copan and Craig miss the schema of creation presented
in 2 Enoch. First, the assertion in 2 Enoch that God created all that
exists “from non-being” (recension A) or “from the non-existent”
(recension J) appears to use the term “non-being” as a reference to the
underlying, formless substrate. It is clear that the invisible from which
the visible things are created is not absolutely nothing, because “before
any visible things had come into existence, I, the ONE, moved around
in the invisible things” (2 Enoch 24:4). God cannot move around in
what does not exist in any way. Moreover, 2 Enoch says that God himself is invisible among the invisible things (2 Enoch 24:4 [A]).
The Lord is the one who laid the foundations upon the
unknown things, and he is the one who spread out the heavens above the visible and the invisible things. And the earth he
solidified above the waters, and waters he based upon the
unfixed things; and he (alone) created the uncountable creatures. . . . From the invisible things and the visible he created
all the visible things; /and/ he himself is invisible. (2 Enoch
47:3–5 [J]; 48:5, emphasis added)
This passage makes it clear that the invisible things are indeed
things and that the uncreated God is counted among the invisible
things. Moreover, in creating, God sets the foundations for the creation
(the first thing used in creating) upon the already existent “unknown
things.” Copan and Craig point out in their book that 2 Enoch asserts
that God created the invisible things as well as the visible. Second
Enoch 65:1[J] states: “Before ever anything existed, and before ever
any created thing was created, the Lord created the whole of his creation, visible and invisible.” They take this passage to teach creation
ex nihilo (CON, p. 102). However, it is clear that God did not create all
the invisible things out of nothing because the text expressly states
that God is uncreated (2 Enoch 33–25)—and God is also one of the
invisible things. Moreover, the language used is very precise: “before
ever any created thing was created.” The text carefully limits the scope
of God’s creation to what is created, implying that there is something
uncreated. Moreover, the text expressly speaks of the “light” as the
uncreated reality. As F. I. Andersen noted: “Out of the original invisible things, God calls two beings: Adoil, from whom is born the great
light, and Arukhas, from whom comes the darkness. Water is made
by thickening a mixture of light and darkness. But light, if anything,
is the great elemental substance.”41
Copan and Craig are correct indeed that a multistage creation is
presented in 2 Enoch, but 2 Enoch does not accept creation ex nihilo.
Several Jewish texts and Romans 4:17 state that God creates by calling to or giving commands to “non-being.” Second Enoch explains
what it is that God calls to: he calls to the light and the darkness as
if they were two sentient beings—Adoil, from whom light issues, and Arukhas, from whom darkness issues (2 Enoch 25:1–5). As Andersen
affirms: “The dualism of light and darkness arises from two primal
beings, Adoil and Ar(u)khas. 2En does not say that God created them,
but they are clearly under his control.”42 From these two invisible things
the rest of creation is created. Second Enoch thus expressly teaches creation from a preexisting substrate of invisible things that do not have
form and thus are referred to as “non-being.” The process of creation,
according to 2 Enoch, is (1) God commands “the lowest things” (or the
most fundamental)—Adoil (to disintegrate into light) and Arukhas (to
disintegrate into darkness); (2) light solidifies into the upper foundation (25:4) and the darkness solidifies into the lower foundation (26:2);
and (3) water is created from the mixture of light and darkness (27:2).
In any event, Copan and Craig have misconstrued 2 Enoch and once
again taken a text that teaches creation from preexisting realities as if it
were evidence of creation out of nothing. Second Enoch is also a crucial
example of the use of the term create to refer to commanding already
existing realities and organizing a cosmos out of formless light.
The Shepherd of Hermas. Copan and Craig next cite the Shepherd
of Hermas, a Christian text from the middle of the second century
(about ad 140). They begin by citing a text from the Mandates: “First,
one must believe that God is one and that he has created and organized
and made them from the non-existence into existence, and contains
all, but alone is uncontained” (πρῶτον πάντων πίστευσον ὅτι εἷς
ἐστὶν ὁ θεός, ὁ τὰ πάντα κτίσας καὶ καταρτίσας, καὶ ποιήσας
ἐκ τοῦ μὴ ὄντος εἰς τὸ εἶναι τὰ πάντα, καὶ πάντα χωρῶν, μόνος
δὲ ἀχώρητος ὤν).43 Copan and Craig take this passage to be a clear
reference to creation out of nothing because God alone is uncontained
whereas matter is contained (CON, p. 128). But such language only
means that the scope of God’s power is not limited to or contained
by his physical presence, whereas matter is so contained. This text
carefully uses language that indicates relative non-being, the ἐκ τοῦ μὴ ὄντος (ek tou mē ontos), rather than absolute negation. Georg
Schuttermayr has presented a very detailed study of the use of οὐκ ἐκ
ὄντων in early Christian authors and Philo and concluded that one
must be careful not to read the notion of creation out of nothing from
such language.44 As Hubler commented,
Once again, ἐκ μὴ ὄντος alone cannot be taken as an absolute denial of material substrate. By itself this phrase is insufficient to carry the burden of a decisive and well-defined position both because ἐκ and ὄν are notoriously equivocal. Ἐκ
does not necessarily designate material cause, but it can be
used temporally. Ὄν does not necessarily refer to absolute
non-being, but the non-existence of what later came to be.
To read creatio ex nihilo in Hermes [sic] goes far beyond the
warrant of the text, which makes no clear claim to the presence or absence of material and provides no discussion of the
position.45
Copan and Craig also cite the Visions: “God, who dwells in heaven,
and created that which is out of non-existence (κτίσας ἐκ τοῦ μὴ
ὄντος).”46 Once again, the technical phrase for relative non-being is
used: ἐκ τοῦ μὴ ὄντος. As we have seen, Aristotle used the phrase ἐκ
τοῦ μὴ ὄντος (ek tou mē ontos) to refer to relative non-being generating new life from parents already existing. Incidentally, it is extremely
significant that the first “scriptural” arguments in history to support
the doctrine of creatio ex nihilo—formulated by Irenaeus (about ad
185) and Origen (ad 220)—did not cite scriptures from the canon
accepted by evangelicals and Latter-day Saints. Rather, Irenaeus and
Origen cited the Shepherd of Hermas and 2 Maccabees 7:28.47 The
reason they cited these texts is obvious—these writers did not know of any scriptures within the canon that supported the doctrine of
creation ex nihilo. It is ironic, therefore, that even these two texts do
not teach the dogma of creatio ex nihilo. It is also significant that the
Shepherd of Hermas adopted the technical language for creation from
the term that describes relative nonbeing—ἐκ τοῦ μὴ ὄντος—which
makes it fairly clear that God created what is from potential being, not
from absolute nothing, or ex nihilo.48
Joseph and Aseneth. Copan and Craig next cite the Jewish pseudepigraphical book Joseph and Aseneth, written sometime between the
second century bc and the second century ad: “Lord God of the ages,
. . . who brought the invisible (things) out into the light, who made the
(things that) are and the (ones that) have an appearance from the nonappearing and non-being” (p. 123).49 However, once again Copan and
Craig do not note that God’s “making to appear those things which
are invisible” (cf. Hebrews 11:3) actually imputes an existing status
to those things that are not seen. Just as in 2 Enoch and Colossians,
the assertion that God made visible things “from the non-appearing
and non-being” simply refers to the already existing, invisible substrate out of which God created visible things. Invisible things are still
things; they simply have not been made visible by God. Indeed, this
view is strongly supported by the fact that the phrase “he brought the
invisible (things) out into light” relies on the Septuagint, Genesis 1:2,
and thus refers to bringing light out of the already existing darkness
of the abyss. The same thought is expressed again in 8:10, which also
relies on the Septuagint text of Genesis 1:2: “Lord God of my father
Israel, the Most High, the Powerful One of Jacob, who gave life to all
(things) and called (them) from the darkness into the light” (author’s
translation). The statement that God calls forth invisible things into
the light to be seen posits the invisible things as already existing in the
darkness of unformed matter.
Odes of Solomon. Copan and Craig also cite the Odes of Solomon,
which were probably composed about ad 100:
And there is nothing outside of the Lord,
because he was before anything came to be.
And the worlds are by his word,
And by the thought of his heart. (NMC, p. 124)50
Again they read the doctrine of creatio ex nihilo into a text that does
not address the issue. This text stresses that, before the world was
created, God existed, and that God created the world by his Word.
However, such beliefs are not inconsistent with creatio ex materia. In
particular, this Ode is a poetic expression of Genesis 1. Copan and
Craig do not note that, earlier in this same Ode, God is said to investigate “that which is invisible,” and it thus posits an already existing
reality prior to God’s creation. Before the creation of the world, God
began his creative activity by investigation of the substrate of invisible
things:
For the word of the Lord investigates that which is invisible,
and perceives his thought.
For the eye sees his works,
and the ear hears his thought.
It is he who spread out the earth,
and placed the waters in the sea. (Odes of Solomon 16:8–10)
As Mario Erbetta notes in his commentary on the Odes of Solomon: “The poet, taking up again the theme of the word of the creator,
finds that it examines that which up until now does not appear; it does
not yet exist, but it still unveils the divine thought. This thought is
nothing other than the divine plan before being realized in being.”51
These invisible things which have not yet been created are not absolute nothing, for they have the power to reveal themselves to God in
their potential being and to bring about the thought that gives rise to
God’s plan to create. The Lord investigates “that which is invisible,”
and thus, once again, the “invisible things” are not absolute nothing but potential existence ready to have form impressed upon it by God.
What does not exist in any sense could not have such creative causal
powers. As such, the invisible things from which God creates the visible things already exist as a potentiality. This passage is actually contrary to the doctrine of creatio ex nihilo.
Second Baruch. Copan and Craig next cite 2 Baruch 21:4 as evidence for creation ex nihilo: “You who created the earth, the one who
fixed the firmament by the word and fastened the height of heaven by
the spirit, the one who in the beginning of the world called that which
did not yet exist and they obeyed you.”52 However, this text clearly does
not express creatio ex nihilo, for God calls to “that which did not yet
exist,” and it obeys him. Ironically, this text seems almost identical to
Joseph Smith’s expression in the Lectures on Faith: “God spake, chaos
heard, and worlds came into order by reason of the faith there was in
him.”53 This text is an especially poignant reminder that the phrase
that which did not exist refers to something that exists already in
potentiality and has capacities to receive yet greater being from God.
In particular, “that which [does] not yet exist” has the capacity to obey
God’s command and to be given form by God’s word.
Aristides of Athens. Copan and Craig also assert that perhaps the
earliest philosophical apologist for Christianity, Aristides of Athens,
expressly taught the doctrine of creation out of nothing. Their analysis is seriously flawed and, indeed, borders on being irresponsible.
Aristides reportedly delivered an apology to the Roman emperor
Hadrian about ad 130. Copan and Craig fail to inform the reader
that the textual sources vary and are quite questionable.54 There are
three recencions of Aristides’ Apology: a shorter Greek version, a much longer Syriac version, and Armenian translations of the Syriac.
Aristides reportedly stated:
Let us come now, O king, also to the history of the Jews
and let us see what sort of opinion they have concerning God.
The Jews then say that God is one, Creator of all and almighty:
and that it is not proper for us that anything else should be
worshipped, but this God only: and in this they appear to be
much nearer to the truth than all the peoples, in that they
worship God more exceedingly and not His works.55
They also cite a passage found only in the shorter Greek recension:
“O King, let us proceed to the elements themselves that we may show
in regard to them that they are not gods, but perishable and mutable,
produced out of that which did not exist (ἐκ τοῦ μὴ ὄντος) at the
command of the true God, who is indestructible and immutable and
invisible, yet he sees all things and, as He wills, modifies and changes
things.”56 Copan and Craig argue that these statements imply creation
out of nothing because Aristides claims that God is both “Artificer
and Creator.” They thus claim that the text asserts: (1) “there is an
ontological distinction between Creator and creature . . . ; and (2) God
created in stages, first bringing into being the elements and then shaping them into a cosmos” (CON, p. 131).
Neither of these assertions is supported by the text. There is not a
word about a two-stage creation in Aristides’ Apology. There is a distinction between creator and creature, but it is not an ontological distinction as claimed by Copan and Craig. Rather, the text merely states
that God is incorruptible and unchangeable, whereas “the elements”
(not “matter”) are subject to decay and change. The elements were
always seen as created from a preexisting substrate that the Greeks
called the τοῦ μὴ ὄντος (tou mē ontos) or “non-being.” Those who
believed in creation ex materia never claimed that matter should be
worshipped or that it is somehow equal with God. It was lifeless and liable to fall into chaos, whereas God is the source of life and order.
Moreover, those who accept creation from preexisting matter also saw
a distinction between the creator who organizes everything that is created and the created, which would be no-thing, completely devoid of
order and form, in the absence of God’s creative activity. Thus, merely
recognizing that God is creator and that he created all that is created
does not imply or logically require creation out of nothing.
More important, this analysis shows very clearly that Copan and
Craig have failed to grasp the essential distinction between relative
non-being, which refers to a material substrate without form, and
absolute nothing in these texts. Aristides (if he said it at all) uses the
exact phrase used by Aristotle to refer to generation of life “out of
non-being” ἐκ τοῦ μὴ ὄντος. The technical language used shows that
this text actually refers to the creation from the preexisting material
substrate of relative non-being without form. Thus, May concludes
quite accurately that: “Aristides means that the elements are created
by God; but it does not appear from his book that he consciously distanced himself from the philosophical model of world-formation and
. . . creation.”57
Second Maccabees. The “poster-child” scripture to support creatio ex nihilo in Jewish sources prior to the time of Christ has always
been 2 Maccabees 7:28, a text found in the Apocrypha and considered
scripture by the Catholic Church but not by either Latter-day Saints
or Protestants. Copan and Craig assert that it “states clearly the traditional doctrine of creatio ex nihilo” (NMC, p. 122). It reads: “I pray you
son, look to heaven and earth and seeing everything in them, know that
God made them from non-being [οὐκ ἐξ ὄντων ἐποίησεν αὐτα], and
the human race began in the same way [καὶ τὸ τῶν ἀνθρώπων γένος
οὕτω γίνεται].”58 This text is quite unclear, however, as to whether
creation from absoute nothing is intended. Many scholars believe that
2 Maccabees teaches creation ex nihilo because it uses the phrase οὐκ
ἐξ ὄντων (ouk ex ontōn), which in the much later Christian apologetic of the late second century was a technical term of art signifying creatio ex nihilo. In this context, however, it is inappropriate to see the
phrase as a philosophical term of art—after all, it is a mother speaking
to her son, not a philosopher addressing learned interlocutors. The
text is probably best read as creation from nonbeing in the sense that
“an artist who, by impressing form on matter, causes things to exist
which did not exist before.”59 An artist creates something completely
new by using preexisting materials. Werner Foerster quotes Scharbau,
who maintains that in 2 Maccabees “the non-existent is not absolute
nothing but . . . the metaphysical substance . . . in an uncrystallized
state.”60 May continues:
The best known text, constantly brought forward as the earliest evidence of the conceptual formulation of the doctrine of
creatio ex nihilo, is 2 Maccabees 7:28. The need for caution in
evaluating this is apparent from the context in which there
is talk of creation “out of nothing.” There is here no theoretical disquisition on the nature of the creation process, but a
parenthetic reference to God’s creative power: . . . A position
on the problem of matter is clearly not to be expected in this
context. The text implies no more than the conception that
the world came into existence through the sovereign creative
act of God, and that it previously was not there.61
Thus, May suggests that the words οὐκ ἐξ ὄντων in 2 Maccabees
should be translated “not out of things being, i.e. already existent individual things.”62 Hubler is in agreement: “Non-being [in 2 Maccabees]
refers to the non-existence of the heavens and earth before God’s creative act. It does not express absolute non-existence, only the prior nonexistence of the heavens and earth. They were made to exist after not
existing.”63 More important, the text of 2 Maccabees 7:28 immediately follows the assertion that God created the world “out of non-being” by
saying that “the human race began the same way.” This phrase suggests that creation of humanity is parallel to creation of the heavens
and earth. Yet “mankind” was not created from nothing but by organizing the dust of the earth (Genesis 2:7). Verse 7 of 2 Maccabees 28
is a mother’s expression of faith that since God created the world in
the first place, he can bring her dead son back to life. Thus, the context suggests very strongly that she is speaking of re-creating what has
been. The mother is not making a claim about creation out of nothing, but about God’s ability to reorganize what had previously existed
in the same way that he had originally organized it. She sees that
God can bring back her son because he created all things in the first
place. Yet the act of bringing a person back to life certainly does not
require creation where there was absolutely nothing before. Further,
we have already seen that Aristotle also stated that generation of life is
from relative non-existence (τοῦ μὴ ὄντος)—and it is probable that
2 Maccabees has in mind the same notion of relative nonbeing as a
preexisting substrate.64
In their book, Copan and Craig attempt to counter the assertion
that God created man “in the same way” that he created the world.
They retreat once again to their two-stage theory of creation: first out
of nothing and then from the chaotic materials to an organized creation. They admit that it is true that humans were not created out of
nothing in the biblical text, but since humans are created from the
dust of the earth, and the earth is created (they claim out of nothing),
they claim that it is the same in 2 Maccabees where reference to creating man refers to a two-stage creation out of nothing (CON, p. 98).
Yet there is absolutely no evidence of a two-stage creation theory in
2 Maccabees. Their ad hoc two-stage theory of creation is imposed on the text as a maneuver to rescue their interpretation from what
the text expressly states. Moreover, just a few verses earlier, the text
states: “It is the creator of the universe who moulds man (πλάσας
ἀνθρώπου) at his birth and plans the origin of all things (γένεσιν
καὶ πάντων). Therefore, he, in his mercy, will give you back life and
breath again” (2 Maccabees 7:23). The text expressly states that in creating man, God “moulds” or shapes man in his creation (πλάσας), in
the sense of shaping a pre-existing clay or matter (see Romans 9:20; 1
Timothy 2:13). Thus, when 2 Maccabees 7:28 affirms that the heavens
and earth are created “in the same way” that God moulded man, the
text presupposes formation from a preexisting matter.
Jewish and Christian Texts Teaching Creatio ex Materia
As demonstrated, it is quite certain that several Jewish texts expressly teach the doctrine of creation out of preexisting matter or a
substrate of potential matter (potential matter is sometimes called
“non-being” or “that which does not exist”—τὸ μὴ ὄν). As shown,
2 Enoch and Joseph and Aseneth taught that God created visible
things from already existing invisible things.65 Similarly, 2 Peter 3:5
teaches that God created the world from the already existing waters,
and Hebrews 11:3, written by a Jew expressly to Jews, teaches creation
from invisible things.
The Wisdom of Solomon. To these texts can be added the Wisdom
of Solomon, a Jewish work dated by David Winston to ad 37–41,66
which expressly teaches the doctrine of creation from matter: “For
not without means was your almighty hand, that had fashioned the
universe from formless matter” (Οὐ γὰρ ἠπόρει ἡ παντοδύναμός
σου χεὶρ καὶ κτίσασα τὸν κόσμον ἐξ ἀμόρϕου ὕλης) (Wisdom of
Solomon 11:17 NAB). Amazingly, Copan and Craig ignore this text
altogether in their article but cite it in their book as a possible example
of creation out of nothing! They assert: At first glance, the apocryphal book of Wisdom of Solomon
(11:17) appears to posit a formless archmatter: God created
“out of formless matter [ex amorphou hylēs]” (NRSV). This
may be true, but even here, we should proceed with caution.
In Wisdom 1:14, there could be in view a two-stage creation:
“he created all things [ektisen . . . ta panta] that they might
have being [to einei]” (NEB). . . . It is plausible to argue that
the hylē (primal matter) out of which the cosmos was made
was the uninhabited “earth [gē],” which was already created
in Genesis 1:1. God shaped the world out of material he previously created. (CON, p. 97)
Hubler appropriately expresses his contempt for such reading into
the text of one’s own preconceived theology. He claims of that argument that “Wisdom of Solomon must have tacitly held that a creatio ex
nihilo occurred before the stated creatio ex materia because the author
could not have accepted the Greek notion of eternal, formless matter. At best this begs the question. At worst it ignores the evidence of
creatio ex materia found in Midrash and Philo.”67 In fact, the text of
the Wisdom of Solomon makes clear that creation out of unformed
matter was seen by Jewish authors as consistent with assertions that
God is all-powerful (παντοδύναμος) (11:17), that he creates the entire
cosmos or universe (κτίσασα τὸν κόσμον) (11:17), and that he creates “the all” or the entirety of all there is (ἔκτισεν . . . τὰ πάντα)
(1:14) out of unformed matter (ἐξ ἀμόρϕου ὕλης) (11:17). Thus, this
text undercuts all of Copan and Craig’s exegetic arguments. They
continually argue that if God is all-powerful and creates all there is,
then creation out of nothing must be the conclusion (see, for example,
CON, pp. 43, 74–75, 84–87, 105–6, 127–28). These terms are all used in
Wisdom of Solomon, however, which expressly teaches creation out of
formless matter.
To assert, as Copan and Craig do, that this text must have a twostage creation in view, where the creation of the cosmos out of formless matter must be preceded by creation out of nothing, imposes on the text a notion that not only does not appear there but is expressly
contrary to what it does state. In light of their eisegesis of the Wisdom
of Solomon, we have to ask: What kind of evidence would be sufficient to show creation out of formless matter if a text that expressly
states that God created the entire cosmos using unformed matter and
says absolutely nothing about a creation out of nothing doesn’t suffice?
Copan and Craig finally retreat to their debater’s stance and a weak
concession:
For the sake of argument, however, let us assume that
Wisdom holds to this Greek hylomorphism (i.e., an eternally
preexistent substrate is given form) and that a two-stage ex
nihilo creation is completely excluded. We can still make a
contrast here in that “the Palestinian [perspective] (II Mac.
vii. 28) insists that all was made by God ‘out of nothing.’”
(CON, p. 97)
Their claim that the Hellenistic Jews believed in creation out of preexisting material, whereas Palestinian Jews believed in creation out
of nothing, is based upon a very questionable reading of 2 Maccabees
7:28, as we have seen.
Philo Judaeus. These texts also offer some understanding of the
context of the writings of Philo Judaeus, the Alexandrian Jewish philosopher, and the Christian writers contemporary with him who referred to
the creation in their works. Writing in the first century, Philo expressly
taught that God created from already existing matter: “This cosmos of
ours was formed out of all that there was of water, and air and fire, not
even the smallest particle being left outside.”68 Elsewhere, Philo stated
that “when the substance of the universe was without shape and figure God gave it these, when it had no definite character God molded
it into definiteness.”69 Philo also asserted that, in the creation of the
world, God summoned what had previously no being into existence,
creating order out of disorder, and distinctive qualities out
of things which had no such qualities, and similarities out
of things dissimilar, and identity out of things which were
different, and intercommunion and harmony out of things
which had previously no communication nor agreement, and
equality out of inequality, and light out of darkness; for he
is always anxious to exert his beneficent powers in order to
change whatever is disorderly from its present evil condition,
and to transform it so as to bring it into a better state.70
Philo’s statement that God “summons what previously had no
being into existence” must be seen as asserting only that the underlying chaos did not have existence in the form of an ordered reality
such as God creates of it by impressing form onto the formless. Copan
and Craig suggest that in Philo’s writings perhaps the matter organized by God was itself created at a prior instant ex nihilo. Frances
Young has demonstrated why such a reading of Philo’s texts forces
an unstated and contrary assumption into the text, attributing to it
something that it does not address at all.71 Copan and Craig rely heavily on the 1966 study of Harry Wolfson in which he argued that Philo
ultimately teaches that the chaotic and unformed matter referred to
in Genesis 1:2 is created and that the chaos relies on Platonic ideas
for its form and creation.72 They also rely on the 1970 study by Ronald
Williamson to argue that Philo’s view of creation diverged from
Plato’s view of an eternal preexistent substratum of existence from
which all else was created by the Demiurge imposing Form upon it.73
However, they virtually misrepresent the much more complete and better-reasoned studies of David T. Runia. They cite Runia in support
of the view that Philo taught creation out of nothing (CON, p. 110). But
Runia expressly rejects their two-stage theory of creation from nothing. Rather, he asserts that, in Philo’s writings, “God the creator bears
a definite resemblance to the Platonic Demiurge, who creates order
out of an already existing chaos. Philo nowhere explicitly indicates
that God himself first created the primordial matter, as would later be
formulated in the classic doctrine of creatio ex nihilo.”74 Runia (whose
dissertation addressed the relation between the thought of Philo and
Plato) corrects the mistakes made by Wolfson and Williamson. As
Runia observed:
Although in the Timaeus Plato explicitly declines to elaborate on the ultimate principles of reality, the cosmological
dialogue was extensively used in order to formulate precisely
such a doctrine. The influence of such attempts can be strongly
felt in the Jewish exegete and philosopher Philo and the early
Christian thinkers Justin and Clement. All three appear to
espouse what one might call a “monarchic dualism.” There is
but one first cause or principle, but beside it a shadowy passive or negative matter is assumed, which is given form in the
act of creation. This line of thinking is abandoned by Tatian,
Theophilus of Antioch and Irenaeus, who for the first time
develop a reasonably clear doctrine of creatio ex nihilo.
75
Copan and Craig make a fundamental assumption about Philo
that turns out to be critically erroneous: they assume that if Philo
believed that God creates the Ideas or Forms, and these in turn give
form to the chaotic matter, then it follows that God also creates the
chaotic matter out of nothing. Philo, however, held that God in fact
eternally creates the Forms and (unlike Plato) that these Forms reside
within God or his Logos rather than independently of God. Still, it does not follow, if the Forms are eternally created and they give form
to the chaotic substrate, that the underlying chaos is itself created. All
that follows is that the Forms give form to an underlying preexisting
chaos—which was Philo’s view. As Philo famously stated:
But Moses, who had early reached the very summits of
philosophy . . . , was well aware that it is indispensable that in
all existing things there must be an active cause, and a passive
subject; and that the active cause is the intellect of the universe, thoroughly unadulterated and thoroughly unmixed,
superior to virtue and superior to science, superior even to
abstract good or abstract beauty; while the passive subject is
something inanimate and incapable of motion by any intrinsic
power of its own, but having been set in motion, and fashioned,
and endowed with life by the intellect, became transformed into
that most perfect work, this world.76
In this passage we see clearly the distinction between God’s intellect as the active cause of creation and the “passive subject” (τὸ δὲ
παθητὸν) that is given form in the act of creation. This passive substrate already exists to receive form from the divine intellect. Philo
also expressly denies that anything can come into being from absolute
non-being or, having once existed, pass into non-being.77 Moreover,
Philo is very clear that unformed matter is not among the realities
created by God:
But there is no material which has any value in the eyes
of God, because he has given all materials an equal share of
his skill. In reference to which it is said in the sacred scriptures, “God saw all that he had made, and, behold, it was very
Good.” [Gen. 1:31.] But the things which receive an equal
degree of praise, are by all means held in equal estimation
by him who confers the praise; and what God praised was not
the materials which he had worked up into creation, destitute of life and melody, and easily dissolved, and moreover in their
own intrinsic nature perishable, and out of all proportion and
full of iniquity, but rather his own skillful work, completed
according to one equal and well-proportioned power and
knowledge always alike and identical. In reference to which
all things were also accounted equal and similar by all the
rules of proportion, according to the principles of art and
knowledge.78
Thus Philo could not allow God to be involved in the creation of
matter because it is evil and Philo is crystal clear that God does not
bring about anything that is evil. It is true that Philo believed that
time had a beginning when God ordered the world and the heavenly
bodies began their revolutions.79 But it appears that Philo believed that
the eternal material substrate was perfectly inactive and passive, and
thus it would have existed as motionless and outside of a time unmeasured by movement.80 It seems to me that Philo’s view is best seen in
light of his view of creation proceeding from the dividing of opposites.
God begins by dividing “the essence of the universe,” from which he
organizes the four essential elements of earth, air, water and fire. This
“essence of the universe” is a formless and motionless substrate that is
capable of receiving form from the divine Ideas through the action of
the Logos. Philo stated:
For as the Creator divided our soul and our limbs in the
middle, so also, in the same manner, did he divide the essence
of the universe when he made the world; for, having taken it,
he began to divide it thus: in the first instance, he made two
divisions, the heavy and the light, separating that which was
thick from that which was more subtle. After that, he again
made a second division of each, dividing the subtle part into
air and fire, and the denser portion into water and earth; and, first of all, he laid down those elements, which are perceptible
by the outward senses, to be, as it were, the foundations of the
world which is perceptible by the outward senses.81
Thus, the order of creation according to Philo seems to be: (1) God
eternally generates the ideas that constitute forms perceptible only to
the mind or invisible things (the κόσμος νοητός); (2) God imposes
order upon a passive and motionless, eternally preexisting substrate by
impressing form upon it and dividing it into equal opposites; (3) God
first creates water, air, earth, and fire; (4) from these four elements
God creates the remainder of the creation; (5) the world or cosmos
thus has a beginning because it is created from “what is not” and time
begins with the creation of the cosmos.
1 Clement. Clement, bishop of Rome, shared the same worldview
as Philo of an eternal fabric or constitution of the world from which
the world was created. Clement stated: “Thou . . . didst make manifest
the everlasting fabric of the world. Thou, Lord, didst create the earth.”
The terms used here by Clement are significant. He asserts that God
did “make manifest” (ἐϕανεροποίησας) the “everlasting fabric of the
world” (Σὺ τὴν ἀέναον τοῦ κόσμου σύστασιν).
82 He is referring to
an eternal substrate that underlies God’s creative activity. Clement is
important because he is at the very center of the Christian church
as it was then developing. His view assumed that God had created
from an eternally existing substrate, creating by “making manifest”
what already existed in some form. The lack of argumentation or further elucidation indicates that Clement was not attempting to establish a philosophical position; he was merely maintaining a generally
accepted one. However, the fact that such a view was assumed is even
more significant than if Clement had argued for it. If he had presented
an argument for this view, then we could assume that it was either a contested doctrine or a new view. But because he acknowledged it as
obvious, it appears to have been a generally accepted belief in the early
Christian church.
Justin Martyr. There are at least four late second-century Christian
philosophers who believed that creation out of matter was the established Christian doctrine. It must be noticed that as we pass from the
biblical texts into the patristic writings of the late second century, the
scope of discourse passes from a nontechnical devotional and revelatory literature to the technical discussions of philosophy. By this time,
philosophical distinctions and assumptions are used to make sense of
the received doctrine. The importance of these philosophers, however,
is not found in their arguments or philosophies but in the fact that
they accepted the background assumption of creation from already
existing matter precisely because they thought it was the received
Christian doctrine.
For example, Justin Martyr, writing about ad 165, taught that
Plato had received his doctrine of creation from Moses’s writings:
And that you may learn that it was from our teachers—
we mean the account given through the prophets—that Plato
borrowed his statement that God, having altered matter which
was shapeless, made the world, hear the very words spoken
through Moses, who, as above shown, was the first prophet,
and of greater antiquity than the Greek writers; and through
whom the Spirit of prophecy, signifying how and from what
materials God at first formed the world (ἐδημιούργησεν ὁ
Θεὸς τὸν κόσμον), spake thus: “In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth. And the earth was invisible
and unfurnished, and darkness was upon the face of the deep;
and the Spirit of God moved over the waters. And God said,
Let there be light; and it was so.” So that both Plato and they
who agree with him, and we ourselves, have learned, and you
also can be convinced, that by the word of God the whole world
was made out of the substance (Ωστε λόγῳ Θεου ἐκ τῶν ὑποκειμένων . . . γεγενῆσθαι τὸν πάντα κόσμον) spoken of
before by Moses.83
Like Philo, Justin Martyr thought that there was no problem in
interpreting Genesis in Platonistic terms—God had created by organizing matter. Yet Justin’s statement that this is a doctrine “we . . .
have learned” gives pause, for he is speaking to Greeks who agree with
Plato. He is claiming that he has learned in the Christian tradition that
via his Word, God created all things by organizing matter and that
this view is older than Plato’s. The verb used by Justin to indicate that
God created by “altering matter” is στρέψαντα (strepsanta), meaning “rotating or turning.” Such language echoes Plato’s view, taught
in the Timaeus, that the Demiurge created the cosmos by setting the
world soul in rotation and that by the same act matter is ordered.84
Further, Justin uses the Platonic term for creation, ἐδημιούργησεν
(edēmiourgēsen), “to fashion or form.” Note also that it is the entire
world—τὸν πάντα κόσμον (ton panta kosmon)—that is formed out
of the amorphous matter. Moreover, Justin gives this explanation in
light of the statement in Genesis 1:1 that “In the beginning, God created the world.” What God did in Genesis 1:1, according to Justin, was
to give form and shape to the underlying material substrate through
the action of his Word.
Earlier in his First Apology, Justin declared: “God, in the beginning, in His goodness made (δημιουργῆσαι) everything out of shapeless matter (ἐξ ἀμόρϕου ὕλης) for the sake of men.”85 Again, Justin
signals that he is referring to the opening statement in the Genesis
creation account, “in the beginning God made” (Ἐν ἀρχῇ έποίσεν ό
Θεὸς). Justin is quoting the Septuagint text of Genesis 1:1. Moreover,
the scope of what God organized from shapeless matter is “everything” (τὰ πάντα). Once again he uses the Platonic term for creation, demiurgesai, the act of the Demiurge in Plato’s thought. These statements leave little doubt that Justin has embraced Middle Platonism
and that he views everything created as having been fashioned out of
a material substrate and that this mode of creation is the meaning of
the Genesis creation account.
Nevertheless, Copan and Craig once again insist that Justin
adopts a two-stage creation in which Justin believed that the formless
matter was first created ex nihilo (CON, pp. 131–34).86 Their primary
argument is that God is referred to by Justin as the only “unbegotten”
(ἀγεννήτος) and “incorruptible” (ἄϕθαρτος) (CON, pp. 132–34).87
They equate being unbegotten and incorruptible with being uncreated, and being begotten and corruptible with being created out of
nothing. Yet it is an equation that is not found in Justin’s writings.
He never connects these terms with creation at all. Their argument
will not bear the weight they place on it in light of Justin’s explicit
statements to the contrary. Once again, we see Copan and Craig forcing their preconceived view onto the text even against explicit and
clear statements to the contrary. It seems to me that Copan and Craig
have highlighted a problem that begins to manifest itself in Justin’s
works. The notion of God adopted by Middle Platonists was not consistent with the earlier Christian views and was inconsistent with
Justin’s views about creation. His adoption of Middle Platonic terms
to describe God placed a gulf between the created and God just as it
did for Philo. It is no mistake that Justin also adopts the Logos as halfway between God and creation. He did not realize this inconsistency,
of course. Justin continued to hold to the view that God created out of
a preexisting substrate that was not created by God. He states clearly
that “everything” is created by giving order to this unformed matter.
He is crystal clear that he is referring to the entire creation recounted
in Genesis 1. It is only with Tatian and Theophilus that we first see a clearly articulated statement as to why the Middle Platonic view of
God that they all adopted was inconsistent with creation out of a preexisting, material substrate.
Athenagoras of Athens. Athenagoras of Athens, writing about ad
170, also taught that God created by crystallizing an already existing
substrate: the Logos, or Word, “came forth to be the idea and energizing power of all material things, which lay like a nature without attributes, and an inactive earth, the grosser particles being mixed up with
the lighter.”88 However, Copan and Craig believe that Athenagoras
adopted a two-stage creation where the “inactive earth” from which
all things were created was itself created ex nihilo. Athenagoras, of
course, never says that there is a two-stage creation, but Copan and
Craig maintain that Athenagoras implicitly adopted creation out of
nothing in the following passage:
But to us, who distinguish God from matter, and teach that
matter is one thing and God another, and that they are separated by a wide interval (for that the Deity is uncreated and
eternal, to be beheld by the understanding and reason alone,
while matter is created and perishable), is it not absurd to apply
the name of atheism?. . . But, since our doctrine acknowledges
one God, the Maker of this universe, who is Himself uncreated (for that which is does not come to be, but that which is
not) but has made all things by the Logos which is from Him.
(CON, p. 134)89
Copan and Craig assert that “unquestionably,” Athenagoras
teaches creation out of nothing here (CON, p. 144). Here they seriously misrepresent Athenagoras’s teachings. Once again we have a
text that explicitly and repeatedly states that God creates by organizing an underlying material substrate, and yet Copan and Craig
wrest the text in an attempt to make it conform to their two-stage theory of creation ex nihilo. It is undeniable that here Athenagoras
does not assert that all things are created “out of nothing,” but merely
that, unlike God, they are “created.” Copan and Craig assume that if
Athenagoras says that everything is created, that means they are created ex nihilo. However, Athenagoras did not use the word create to
mean creation out nothing. His statement is consistent with the view
that God organized the material substratum in creating and that all
things are therefore created whereas God is not organized by himself.
So I agree that Athenoragoras distinguishes between creator and the
created, but it is not the ontological distinction between the absolutely
non-existent and self-existent, but between what can fall apart and
perish because it has been organized and given form and that which is
eternal and imperishable.90
 Indeed, Copan and Craig cite another passage (p. 135) that they
believe supports creation out nothing; but in reality it supports the
view that Athenagoras thinks of creation as organized unformed
matter:
Because the multitude, who cannot distinguish between matter and God, or see how great is the interval which lies between
them, pray to idols made of matter, are we therefore, who do
distinguish and separate the uncreated and the created, that
which is [τὸ ὂν] and that which is not [τὸ οὐκ ὄν], that which
is apprehended by the understanding and that which is perceived by the senses . . .91
It is clear that Athenagoras distinguishes between the creator and
the created, yet Copan and Craig fail to acknowledge that this assertion is followed by an explanation that undercuts their entire argument. First, the phrase τὸ οὐκ ὄν refers to the underlying material
substrate and not to absolute nothing.92 More important, and decisively, Athenagoras is explicit that his view of creation is organization and framing and that God is like an artist who stands in relation to
the matter he has created as a potter stands to the clay:
But if they [God and matter] are at the greatest possible
remove from one another—as far asunder as the artist and
the materials of his art—why are we called to account? For as
is the potter and the clay (matter being the clay, and the artist
the potter), so is God, the Framer of the world, and matter,
which is subservient to Him for the purposes of His art. But
as the clay cannot become vessels of itself without art, so neither did matter, which is capable of taking all forms, receive,
apart from God the Framer, distinction and shape and order.
And as we do not hold the pottery of more worth than him
who made it, nor the vessels or glass and gold than him who
wrought them; but if there is anything about them elegant in
art we praise the artificer, and it is he who reaps the glory
of the vessels: even so with matter and God—the glory and
honour of the orderly arrangement of the world belongs of
right not to matter, but to God, the Framer of matter. So that,
if we were to regard the various forms of matter as gods, we
should seem to be without any sense of the true God, because
we should be putting the things which are dissoluble and perishable on a level with that which is eternal.93
So God is one who organizes matter in the same way that a potter
forms the clay—and such an analogy certainly is inconsistent with
creation ex nihilo.
94 In fact, Athenagoras is explicit that his view of creation is the same as Plato’s, who also says that God creates all things: But, inasmuch as it is impossible to demonstrate without
the citation of names that we are not alone in confining the
notion of God to unity, I have ventured on an enumeration of
opinions. Plato, then, says, “To find out the Maker and Father
of this universe is difficult; and, when found, it is impossible
to declare Him to all,” conceiving of one uncreated and eternal God. And if he recognises others as well, such as the sun,
moon, and stars, yet he recognises them as created: “gods, offspring of gods, of whom I am the Maker, and the Father of
works which are indissoluble apart from my will; but whatever
is compounded can be dissolved.” If, therefore, Plato is not an
atheist for conceiving of one uncreated God, the Framer of
the universe, neither are we atheists who acknowledge and
firmly hold that He is God who has framed all things by the
Logos, and holds them in being by His Spirit.95
It is transparent that Athenagoras believed that his views of God
as the uncreated creator were the same as Plato’s. He states that, just
as Plato believed that one God framed the universe, so Christians also
believe that God framed all things through the Logos or Word of God.
He expressly states that Plato makes the same distinction between creator and created that Christians do. Yet it is clear that Plato believed
that the universe had been created by organizing a preexisting material substrate. Thus, Copan and Craig have failed to read Athenagoras
within the context of his own statements about the creator/creature
dichotomy and have imposed their own theological agenda on him.
Athenagoras is very clear that when he refers to “created things” he
means those things that have forms or “patterns”: “for created things are like their patterns; but the uncreated are unlike, being neither produced from any one, nor formed after the pattern of any one.”
It must be recognized that Athenagoras’s doctrine is thoroughly
Platonic, notwithstanding the fact that he seeks to defend Christian
doctrine. He posits a vast chasm between the created and the creator
such that an intermediary is necessary for God to have contact with
the world. He presents a thoroughly Middle Platonic view of God.
His view of the Logos, in particular, is derived from Stoicism and
Platonism. The Logos is the energizing instrument of God through
whom the underlying substrate of matter is given form from the Ideas
of God:
But if, in your surpassing intelligence, it occurs to you to
inquire what is meant by the Son, I will state briefly that He
is the first product of the Father, not as having been brought
into existence (for from the beginning, God, who is the
eternal mind [νοῦς], had the Logos in Himself, being from
eternity instinct with Logos [λογικός]); but inasmuch as He
came forth to be the idea and energizing power of all material things, which lay like a nature without attributes, and an
inactive earth, the grosser particles being mixed up with the
lighter.96
Hermogenes. The writings of Tertullian tell of Hermogenes, another
Christian philosopher writing around the end of the second century
who believed in creation ex materia. Hermogenes wrote after Tatian
and Theophilus had formulated the doctrine of creatio ex nihilo. By
this time, all parties discussing the issue were working from Middle
Platonic assumptions about God and matter. Tertullian tells us that
Hermogenes argued for the existence of eternal matter based on the
Middle Platonic assumption that matter is evil and therefore cannot
be created by a good God:
But we find evil things made by him, although not by
choice or will. Because if they were made by his choice or will, 
he would have made something inconsistent or unworthy of
himself. What he does not make by his choice, must be understood to be made by the fault of another thing: from matter
without doubt.97
Clement of Alexandria. Finally, Clement of Alexandria, writing
about ad 220, also adopted the view that matter is eternal and that
God created by organizing a chaotic substratum. Indeed, Clement
used the phrase made out of nothing three times in the Stromata, but
each time he used the technical term ἐκ μὴ ὄντος, which shows that
he was discussing creation from relative nonbeing rather than creatio
ex nihilo.98 Clement clearly favored creation ex materia in a poem:
O King . . .
Maker of all, who heaven and heaven’s adornment
By the Divine Word alone didst make;
. . . according to a well-ordered plan;
Out of a confused heap who didst create
This ordered sphere, and from the shapeless mass
Of matter didst the universe adorn.99
These texts are significant because they show that creation out of
matter was still the accepted view. Further, as Young indicates, these
texts show that creatio ex nihilo was not an inheritance from either the
Jewish or the earliest Christian tradition during the apostolic period.
Young’s reasons for rejecting the assumption of a Jewish origin for the
doctrine include:
(i) the sparsity of reference to the doctrine in Jewish
texts, and indeed in the earliest Christian material, and the
problem of interpreting those references that do exist . . . ;
(ii) the contrary evidence of the Wisdom of Solomon
and the works of Philo, and in early Christianity, of Justin,
Athenagoras, Hermogenes and Clement of Alexandria. All these authors seem quite happy to adopt without question the
Platonic view of an active and passive element, namely God
plus matter. The fact that Philo can even so speak of things
being created ex ouk ontōn shows that the term could be
understood as consistent with the notion of pre-existent matter which he takes for granted elsewhere. Middle Platonism
was married with Jewish tradition without any sense of
tension;
(iii) the lack of interest in creatio ex nihilo in Jewish tradition prior to the Middle Ages: the Rabbis condemn speculation about creation as much as about the chariot-throne of
God!

