Plot and Character
In his Poetics, the Greek philosopher Aristotle tells us that there are six elements in any theatrical production: plot, character, thought, diction, spectacle, and music. This list will be useful to us in understanding the theatre and cinema that we will study in this course, including Macbeth and Casablanca. In this lesson we will examine each of these elements in turn and their effect on theatrical performances through the ages. Furthermore, we will see how these elements continue to influence 20th century American cinema.

PLOT Aristotle says that plot is the principle element, or starting place, for a dramatic poet: "The plot, then, is the first principle, and, as it were, the soul of a tragedy." Plot refers not to the story alone, but to anything that affects the organization of the action. In a play, a playwright organizes the story in such a way as to present it in a reasonably short period of time (usually two to three hours), and a director works with the actors on the things that have an impact on the way the story is told, including the delivery of lines, the staging (where to stand or sit and when to move), and the pace of the action.

With a movie, the scenes are shot out of order, according to the dictates of a production schedule. For instance, all scenes that take place at a certain location may be shot together. The same may be true of scenes that feature a specific group of actors, costumes, or makeup. Many shots are taken of each scene, each with different delivery by the actors, scene composition, camera angles, lighting, and a myriad of other details. An editor then works with the director to select which scenes are actually used in the film and the order in which they are presented. Much of the film originally shot ends up on the cutting room floor.

The success of a story, on the stage or the screen, lies in the way the plot unfolds. Every good story, Aristotle tells us, has two parts to it, which he calls complication and denouement (pronounced day-noo-moh): "By Complication I mean all from the beginning of the story to the point just before the change in the hero's fortunes; by Denouement, all from the beginning of the change to the end." And each part is equally important: "there are many dramatists who after a good Complication, fail in the Denouement. But it is necessary for both points of construction to be duly mastered."

The complication of Oedipus Rex stretches from the beginning of the play to the point when Oedipus discovers for himself that he has killed his father and married his mother. We must remember that Oedipus Rex, like all Greek tragedies, was based on a mythical story that was already familiar to the Athenian audience-much of the play's power derived from this because it allowed the playwright to refer to things that the audience already knew but the characters in the drama did not. It also meant that the play could focus on a short period of time (usually twenty-four hours) without having to fill in all the background story. (This may be one reason why Hollywood keeps making the same movies over and over again.)

Aristotle tells us that the complication of Oedipus Rex is there to increase our fear on behalf of our hero. We already know who he is and what he did. But we are afraid what he will do when he finds out. Little by little the playwright reveals information that turns up the volume on our fear. First we are told that the plague has been sent because the people of Thebes have let the murderer of their king go unpunished. Then Oedipus questions an old blind man, Teiresias, who refuses to tell Oedipus anything. After Oedipus curses him for being so uncooperative, Teiresias responds,

Listen to me. You mock my blindness, do you?
But I say that you, with both your eyes, are blind:
You cannot see the wretchedness of your life,
Nor in whose house you live, no, nor with whom.
Who are your father and mother? Can you tell me?
You do not even know the blind wrongs
That you have done them, on earth and in the world below.
But the double lash of your parents' curse will whip you
Out of this land some day, with only night
Upon your precious eyes.

This is an example of foreshadowing, and its effect here is especially powerful because we already know what Oedipus' fate is going to be. But Oedipus is still filled with hubris and demands to know the truth. He discovers that an old man (a shepherd) escaped when Laïos, the king of Thebes, was killed. Oedipus sends for him. At this juncture, a Messenger from Corinth arrives and tells of the death of old King Polybos, the king of Corinth-the man Oedipus assumes to be his father. This is good news, because not only will Oedipus inherit a second kingdom, but it means that the prophecies of the oracles are false-the king, his father, is dead, and Oedipus did not kill him. But this good news is quickly changed to bad when the Messenger tells him that he was not the son of Polybos, but that another shepherd found him in the mountains and gave him to the Messenger, who in turn presented him to the King and Queen of Corinth.

This change from good news to bad, or any kind of shift in a plot from one kind of situation to its opposite, Aristotle calls peripety. It is a common device in theatre and cinema. A good example of it is in the following clip from Casablanca, set in French North Africa during the Second World War. The Germans have defeated France and outlawed any exhibition of French patriotism. Most of the French people portrayed in the movie to this point have been to some degree or another collaborators, or people who are getting along by cooperating with their German conquerors. The scene is in a café where a group of German soldiers are singing a military march. But then a patriot comes forward and tells the band to play the Marseillaise, the French national anthem.The peripety of the scene is one of the emotional high points of the film, and it is highlighted by both the shift in the music and in the change of character that we see portrayed in the actors.

Film Title: Casablanca
Description: The music creates peripety in the dramai
Director: Michael Curtiz




The news that Oedipus and his parents have fulfilled the oracle's prophecies, that they have not been able to escape their destiny, ends the complications of the play. A lesser poet than Sophocles might let the tragedy end quickly, for after all, there's nothing else to tell. But Sophocles knew the need for a good denouement, and 353 lines (a full one-quarter of the length of the drama) is spent lamenting Oedipus' tragic fall. This is the opportunity for the audience to feel pity, to empathize with Oedipus and share his sorrow; we would feel cheated if it were over too quickly. Peter Jackson's Return of the King likewise has a surprisingly long denouement-Frodo and Sam are rescued by the eagles almost an hour before the film comes to an end. But, a mighty story needs a mighty conclusion, and Jackson felt that the audience needed time to celebrate the reunions, the coronation of the king, and the various farewells.

But one question still remains unanswered at this point-if fear and pity are such unpleasant things, why does it give us pleasure to see them represented in a play or movie? We might expect Aristotle to say that the imitations of fear and pity are not real, and because we know they cannot hurt us, we are free to enjoy their imitation-much like a roller coaster ride induces the feeling of falling, all the while assuring us that we are quite safe. But in fact, Aristotle says no such thing. Rather, he is at pains to point out that the more real a tragedy appears, the more pleasure it gives us. So, the answer must lie elsewhere.

Aristotle's teacher, Plato, agreed that tragedy had the power to induce fear and pity, but he believed that because fear is a bad thing, it is wrong to induce it in people, and therefore tragedy was harmful to the individual and society. But Aristotle obviously disagreed; since he is every bit as concerned with the good of the individual and society as Plato, he must have seen some virtue in tragedy or he would not have spent so much time discussing it. The answer comes in chapter six of the Poetics:

A tragedy, then, is the imitation of an action that is serious and also, having magnitude, complete in itself; in language with pleasurable accessories, each kind brought in separately in the parts of the work; in a dramatic, not in a narrative form; with incidents arousing pity and fear, wherewith to accomplish its catharsis of such emotions [Italics mine].

Catharsis is a Greek word that means "purification," and we have all felt it. Take for example the unhappy event of a girl breaking up with her boyfriend. It may have been the best thing she ever did. He was bad to her, and unfaithful, and she will be a much better person without him. It makes no sense at all that she would be sad to see him go. And yet her heart is breaking. No amount of reasoning makes her feel better. She knows the reasons for breaking up were valid. She has no intention of going back to him. And yet, the fact that her emotions are irrational doesn't make them any less real. In fact, rather than reasoning her emotions away, she will find her solace in a sad song, or a romantic novel, or a "chick flick," and she'll have a good cry and feel much better. This good feeling that comes after a good cry, or a good laugh for that matter, is what we call "catharsis."

In a tragedy, fear and pity are pleasurable because of the order in which they are induced-"each kind brought in separately in the parts of the work." Fear is induced during the complication-as we see the protagonist move through the action of the play, the playwright allows us to have information that the protagonist does not have, and therefore we begin to fear for the outcome of the protagonist's actions. A good tragic plot will increase this fear right up to the point when the worst actually happens - Lokaste hangs herself and Oedipus puts out his own eyes. But at that moment, there is nothing left to fear, and as the tragedy enters its denouement, we are led to pity the protagonist. Fear, indeed, is an ignoble passion, but pity is not, and should be cultivated, and therefore the tragedy makes us better people, not worse.

This moment of conversion from fear to pity is the catharsis. To Aristotle, what was purified was the play itself-instead of being a play about frightening things, it becomes a play about empathy. But the purification does not just take place inside the play-it takes place inside us. Perhaps it teaches us to convert our own fears to more noble passions. Perhaps the fear in the tragedy is purged along with our own fears, the way an emetic purges poison. But I think Aristotle gives the best reason of all:

Although the objects themselves may be painful to see, we delight to view the most realistic representations of them in art … The explanation is to be found in a further fact: to be learning something is the greatest of pleasures not only to the philosopher but also to the rest of mankind, however small their capacity for it; the reason of the delight in seeing the picture is that one is at the same time learning-gathering the meaning of things.

Aristotle's "proper pleasure" of any kind of art is that it makes us happy because it teaches us something. In other words, art is a positive good, beauty pleases without filling any interest or need, and we do not necessarily have to be suffering from any ill to derive benefit from a good story. No matter how mature we become, how sophisticated and intellectual, how self controlled and serene, we never outgrow our need for art.

While the Greek's preferred tragedy, most films of the 20th century have a happy ending. But the principles of complication, peripety, catharsis, and denouement are the same; it's just that with a happy ending, the peripety takes the drama in an unexpectedly good direction-John Wayne shoots all the bad guys, Gollum bites off Frodo's finger and drops the ring in Mt. Doom, Luke Skywalker's love turns his father back to the Good Side. And there's one other difference-where the Greek playwright expected his audience to know how the story would end, the 20th century moviemaker wants the peripety to be a surprise-no spoilers allowed.

Tragedy's sister, which grew up right alongside of it, is comedy. Aristotle wrote a third book of Poetics, which has been lost, which dealt with this noble art. It is unfortunate that we do not have his evaluation of how comedy makes us laugh, but using his principles, we may draw a few conclusions. Like tragedy, comedy is an imitation of life. Laughter and tears are two different reactions to the same thing-the contrast between the way things are and the way we think they should be. I am sure that Aristotle would be quick to point out that in both cases, it is the imitation that pleases. But in the case of comedy, the imitation does not always strive to be as accurate as possible; in fact, we can identify two different types of comedy, often called "high" and "low," based on how realistic the imitation is. High comedy is often called comedy of character, and it seeks to give as accurate a portrayal of people as possible, and in watching it we usually smile a lot, and sometimes cry, because these people remind us of ourselves or people we have known.

Film Title: A Philadelphia Story
Description: Jimmy Stewart and Katherine Hepburn demonstrate high comedy
Director: George Cukor


(04:31 mins, "The Philadelphia Story" TranscriptLinks to an external site.)

Low comedy, on the other hand, seeks to caricature rather than characterize, and often the comedy is rather physical, laden with slapstick pratfalls. However, even in the caricatures, we still recognize humanity, and we laugh at the there-but-for-the-grace-of-God-go-I mishaps in which the characters find themselves. In fact, there is some evidence that our minds are better equipped to recognize caricatures than actual people, and studies have shown that people sometimes recognize cartoons of political figures better than they do accurate sketches or even photographs. This may be because our mind remembers faces by categorizing them according to the predominant features-big noses, fat cheeks, droopy eyes, bushy eyebrows. In other words, our minds automatically make caricatures of everyone we meet, and perhaps that is why low comedy is more recognizable, and often more popular, than high comedy.

Film Title: It's a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World
Description: Jonathan Winters demonstrates low comedy.
Director: Stanley Kramer





Plots can be presented in a variety of ways. Some plays and movies tell a story in a more or less straightforward, linear fashion, portraying the events more or less in the order in which they occurred. Star Wars: A New Hope follows this pattern: the Empire captures Princess Leia's ship; she sends two droids to the planets surface with a message for Obi-wan Kenobi; the droids find their way to Luke Skywalker, who takes them to Obi-wan Kenobi; Obi-wan teaches Luke about the force, and Han Solo takes them in the Millennium Falcon to rescue the princess; Luke and Han rescue Leia, and Obi-wan is killed in a light saber duel with Darth Vader; Luke and Han escape; Luke uses the force to destroy the Death Star, and they all live happily ever after for the remaining two or three minutes of the denouement. The feeling is that all of this took place within a relatively short span of time, perhaps a day or two. Of course there needs to be an occasional explanation of things that took place years before (called backstory), like Obi-wan fighting alongside Luke's father in the Clone Wars, but this information is shared in a sentence or two, and the movie is curiously free of flashbacks (something that Lukas would more than compensate for with three "prequels").

Other plays and films are not so straightforward. Sometimes a work will start at a key moment in the story, then use flashbacks and reminiscences to tell the backstory. The Lord of the Rings movies, for instance, start with long narratives that relate important events in the history of Middle Earth that are important to understanding the plot of the movie. Some stories are told by starting at a climax near the end, and then use flashbacks to relate the events that led up to this point; Casablanca uses this technique. Often a playwright or director purposefully holds back important information until the last possible moment-this is especially the case with mysteries. On rare occasions, a director gives us all the information we need to solve the riddle, but distracts us at key moments with irrelevant or misleading information. (M. Night Shyamalan's The Sixth Sense is a masterful example.)

Some plays and films do not follow a linear structure at all. Cyclical plots follow a "round" pattern. Unlike the linear structure, there is no reversal of fortune, and the protagonist is returned to the same state he or she was in at the beginning usually having never learned or been disturbed by the outcome of the conflict. Think of an episode of Seinfeld-the characters undergo some trial or struggle, but once it's resolved, they return to normal life. Like the cycle of seasons or the life cycle, circular stories follow a predictable series of events that return to the starting point.

Episodic plots feature several conflicts that are introduced and resolved in succession. Each of the conflicts has its own beginning, middle, and end. Episodic plots are generally related by theme or by a larger overarching conflict. A good example would be a television series like 24 where each episode is complete, but the whole series has its own larger conflict or thematic or character progression.

Dramatic structure can also be seen through the arrangement of the principle divisions of a dramatic work. Most plays are divided into two to five acts, which in turn can be divided into a number of scenes.

CHARACTER In every good story, the engine that drives the drama is some kind of conflict. Conflict is created when the characters in the drama are presented with choices. The conflict can be between two different characters, or within a single character. Sometimes the inner struggle is more revealing than the outward action. In any good plot the main characters are presented with alternatives and choices. These choices are important not just for what the characters do, but often for what they don't do-in other words, not only for what happens, but for what could have happened if the characters had made different choices. Conflict allows us, as an audience, to see deeply into the human personality and ponder our own values in the choices we make. It also encourages our empathy as we see the characters struggle with the conflicts they encounter.

For this reason, Aristotle says that character is second only to plot in its importance to the drama. Character is especially important to plays and films because, unlike novels, there are few opportunities for long descriptive passages. Rather, actors on the stage or screen communicate most of the story as lines. From Greek theatre, we have the terms protagonist and antagonist. The protagonist is the "first contestant" or the primary character in a play. The antagonist might be described as the primary character's opponent. We sometimes think of the protagonist as a hero, and the antagonist as a villain. But protagonists are not always good, and antagonists are not always evil. Shakespeare's Macbeth is clearly the center of the drama and is presented with most of the important choices. He, like Oedipus, is a man of extraordinary talents and great opportunity. And yet, his insatiable ambition leads him from one heinous crime to another. His primary antagonist is not one of his many enemies, but his own wife, who goads on his ambition at the expense of his other virtues.

Playwrights and screenwriters have a wide array of different kinds of characters at their disposal. Some of these include:

Extraordinary characters-Kings, queens, gods, nobles, heroes, and so on. These might also include characters that are the best (or worst) at some extreme of human behavior, like a great warrior or athlete. The Greeks were fascinated with characters who were half-god, half-man, like Hercules and Achilles, because they had superhuman powers with mortal weaknesses. Likewise, Hollywood produces movie after movie about superheroes grappling with super-villains whose primary advantage is their absence of conscience.
Representative characters-These are ordinary, commonplace characters that embody a group of people. Rick Blaine in Casablanca is an average Joe trying to wait out the war without taking sides, but his conscience eventually forces him to take sides. As such, he represents the whole of the American nation that tried to remain neutral in World War II but was eventually persuaded to take sides with the Allies. Representative characters are often rendered in great detail but may be sympathetic or unsympathetic.
Stock characters-These exemplify a trait or characteristic. They are not usually fully rounded characters, but are characterized by some tendency or personality. Self-important businessmen, grumpy old men, dumb blondes, and super-patriotic military commanders are common stock characters.
Narrators-These speak directly to the audience and guide them through the story and its implications. In some cases they are the protagonist, and in others they are a less-important character. Sometimes the narrator does not appear in the movie at all. Sometimes he is integral to the story telling, and other times he just gives a brief introduction. Of course many plays and movies don't use a narrator at all. In Greek theatre, a full chorus was used to narrate the drama and provide commentary.
Minor characters-These generally appear briefly and help support the principle characters. These roles are small, but often memorable and sometimes appealing enough to attract first-rate actors. These are also called cameo, or "walk-on" roles. Most of you will remember Billy Crystal's unforgettable performance in The Princess Bride.
Film Title: The Princess Bride
Description: Billy Crystal makes an unforgettable cameo appearance
Director: Rob Reiner



On both stage and screen, the actors partner directly with the writer and the director to create the characters. Specific actors specialize in specific types of roles. A leading man or a leading lady needs to be a strong actor capable of creating sympathy in the audience for the choices the character will make in the course of the drama.

Usually leading characters also have a certain physical attractiveness as well. Eugene Pallette was a dashing and handsome leading man in the silent film era, but he had a deep, comical-gravelly voice that didn't match his slender frame. When the era of sound came along, he gained 150 pounds and made an enormously (no pun intended) successful second career as a character actor, playing roles such as Friar Tuck in the 1938 version of The Adventures of Robin Hood.

friarTuck

Eugene Pallette, The Adventures of Robin Hood
In a tradition going back to the Renaissance, leading men and leading ladies are usually accompanied by a friend or companion who becomes the second man or second lady. This couple of second man and second lady often get involved in a secondary love interest. These roles are usually more comical and require actors who are less attractive and funnier. A good example is Danny Kaye and Vera-Ellen in White Christmas.

caroling

Bing Crosby, Rosemary Clooney, Danny Kaye, Vera-Ellen, White Christmas
Comedy requires a special kind of timing and delivery that not all actors are good at. Occasionally, an actor will excel at both comedy and drama-Cary Grant and George Clooney are both good examples. Some actors make a career of playing a single character type. John Wayne almost always played the same character in whatever film he was cast. Occasionally an actor will be woefully miscast. A poor casting decision can sink an otherwise good film-Hayden Christensen comes to mind, in his role as the bratty, boy-band Anakin Skywalker (soon to become Darth Vader) in the Star Wars prequels.
