In the late works of Michelangelo, we observe the master placing more and more emphasis on the expression of emotion, and less and less on the physical realism of his subjects. To see the contrast we need only look at the Sistine Chapel ceiling and contrast it with the wall that Michelangelo painted three decades later.

The Last Judgment was one of Michelangelo's last works, and is full of Catholic dread of death and the terror of sinners in the hands of an angry God.

The Last Judgment, Sistine Chapel, Michelangelo

Michelangelo, Last Judgment, Sistine Chapel, 1508-12

Instead of detailed, classically balanced renderings of the human form, the fresco's figures writhe in jubilation or agony. In some cases the limbs are elongated and distorted. The colors are loud to the point of clashing. Most of all, the painting is filled with action, almost more than the frame can hold. Clearly, the old painter had moved from an Apollonian to a Dionysian style.

The Last Judgment: Detail: Michelangelo

Michelangelo, Last Judgment: Detail, 1508-12

Many of these are characteristics of what would come to be known as the Baroque style. Baroque comes from the Portuguese word Barocco, which refers to a large, irregularly shaped pearl. It's a pearl gone crazy-it's too big and it seems that Nature has gone too far. "Going too far" is an apt phrase for the Baroque style that dominated the arts roughly from 1600-1775.

The Doctrine Of Affections The Apollonian/Dionysian dichotomy demonstrates that there is more than one way to appeal to the human soul. Apollonian art appeals to man's cognitive side. Dionysian is more affective. Affective is an old-fashioned word that is akin to our modern word emotional. Today we often think of emotions as things that aren't truly real. When a wife tells a husband that they shouldn't do something because it doesn't "feel right," he is apt to respond that she is "just being emotional." Or take the unhappy event of a girl breaking up with her boyfriend. It may have been the best thing she ever did. He was bad to her and unfaithful, and she will be a much better person without him. It makes no sense at all that she would be sad to see him go. And yet, her heart is breaking. No amount of reasoning makes her feel better. She knows the reasons for breaking up were valid. She has no intention of going back to him. And yet, the fact that her emotions are irrational doesn't make them any less real.

In the 1600s, when the word affection was used to describe emotion, people believed that these feelings had a direct physical cause. Affections were the result of various combinations of humors-bodily fluids generated in the glands, such as blood, phlegm, and bile. Blood, for instance, made you hopeful, or sanguine (from the Latin sangue, or blood), but too much made you apoplectic. Phlegm balanced the blood, but too much made you dull and lazy, or phlegmatic. Too much yellow bile and you became jaundiced (from the French word jaune, meaning yellow), and too much black bile made you melancholy (melas chole is Greek for "black bile").

Baroque artists believed that outside stimuli affected all of the humor-producing glands. For instance, the light reflected from certain colors on a painting could stimulate our spleens and fill us with melancholy. A musical melody with an upward thrust and wide leaps could make the heart leap for joy. To this day we hear melodies in the major mode (such as "Deck the Halls") as happy tunes, while those in minor (such as "Greensleeves") are serious or even sad. In the 1600s, composers and artists carefully studied and catalogued various techniques that stirred the humors. This idea was called the Doctrine of Affections. In the Baroque era, art did not just have the capability of moving the affections: it was its duty to do so.

Today you might consider the ancient belief in the humors and art's ability to move them a little naïve, and you probably don't think of emotions as the result of physical stimuli. We make use of art, nonetheless, in much the same way. The girl irrationally mourning her lost love, unmoved by rational arguments that she is better off with out him, will find her solace in a sad song, or a romantic novel, or a "chick flick," and she'll have a good cry and feel much better. It's all very irrational, but for whatever reason, it works. Just because it's irrational, doesn't mean it's not real.

Baroque Philosophers To René Descartes, however, the world was a supremely rational machine, a magnificent clock that kept perfect time, created by the Greatest of all Clockmakers. Descartes (1596-1650) was a French mathematician and philosopher who saw the world as a perfectly ordered and mathematically inspired creation. He was the inventor of analytical geometry and one of the key figures of the scientific revolution of the age.

Rene Descartes, Franz Hals

Franz Hals, René Descartes, 1648

Although he remained a Catholic until his death, Descartes' philosophy was deeply affected by John Calvin's ideas about predestination. God, he said, was absolutely free in His creation of man and the universe. God's will is law. Man is like a machine, developed by the perfect mechanic. For Descartes, God is principally a creative principle. After the initial act of creation, God mostly sat back and let His machine run itself. Descartes' contemporary Blaise Pascal said, "I cannot forgive Descartes; in all his philosophy, Descartes did his best to dispense with God. But Descartes could not avoid prodding God to set the world in motion with a snap of his lordly fingers; after that, he had no more use for God."

Descartes is perhaps best know for his statement Cogito ergo sum-"I think, therefore I am." If a man doubts his own existence, Descartes taught, then someone or something must be doing the doubting. Therefore his very act of doubting proves his existence. Man perceives his body through the use of his senses, but his senses are unreliable and often deceive him. So, Descartes determined, the only kind of knowledge beyond doubt is that man is a "thinking thing." Later on in his life, Descartes came to believe that since a benevolent God created man, man's senses do not desire to deceive him and can be trusted to a limited extent. Nevertheless, for Descartes, man's reason is always superior to his sensory observation. Man figures things out first by thinking, and only later by making observations.

Descartes was joined in his devotion to reason by two other philosophers of the age, Baruch Spinoza (1632-1677), a Jewish Dutchman of Portuguese descent, and Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (1646-1716), a Protestant German. Spinoza believed that God and Nature are two names for the same reality, and contended that this single substance was the basis of the universe. Everything in the universe happens because it is meant to happen. Human freedom is merely our capacity to know that we are being determined and to understand why we act as we do. Freedom is not the possibility to say "no," but the possibility to say "yes" and to understand why things happen the way they do.

Spinoza

Spinoza

Leibniz, the inventor of infinitesimal calculus, argued that our universe was "the best of all possible worlds," an attitude that would be mercilessly satirized in Voltaire's Candide. Leibniz formulated this concept in response to the question, "Why does evil exist in a world created by a perfectly good God?" Leibniz reasoned that a perfect God would create the best of all possible worlds. For God to remove evil from the world, he would need to remove free will. A world without free will was worse than a world without evil. Therefore a world where there was the possibility of evil was the best of all possible worlds.

Leibnitz

Leibnitz

War In The Age Of Reason Together Descartes, Spinoza, and Leibniz spun out the philosophy of what would become known as the Age of Reason. But for those living at the time, the world was not a very rational place. The conflicts about religion that had largely been averted in the 1500s came to a head in the 1600s. In 1619 a mob of angry Protestant Czechs threw two Catholic Austrian government ministers out of an upstairs window in Prague. This Defenestration of Prague marked the beginning of the Thirty Years' War, a conflict that would ravage Germany, deplete her population by at least a third, and leave her fragmented into over 300 independent kingdoms, duchies, bishoprics, electorates, free cities, and principalities. At first the conflict was mostly between the Catholic emperor and his Protestant subjects, but the conflict eventually became pan-European as first Denmark, then Sweden, then France and Spain intervened.

The Defenestration of Prague, Merian

Matthäus Merian, The Defenestration of Prague, 1618

The 1600s were also a time of conflict in England, between Catholic-leaning monarchs and a Protestant Parliament. In 1642, King Charles I fled London and raised an army against Parliament, and for seven years there was Civil War in England. In 1649, the conflict ended when Parliament captured the king and beheaded him.

Anthony Van Dyke, Charles I

Anthony Van Dyke, Charles I at the Hunt, 1635

From 1649-1659 England was ruled first by Parliament and then by a Puritan dictator named Oliver Cromwell.

Oliver Cromwell

Oliver Cromwell

The Puritans were Calvinist and wanted to purify the English church of Catholic influence, removing art, imagery, robes, candles, and incense from the church and replacing it with a fundamentalist austerity. By the time Cromwell died the English were thoroughly tired of it all, and in 1660 Parliament invited Charles II, who had been living in France, to come home and restore the kingdom.

King Charles II, Thomas Hawker

Thomas Hawker, King Charles II, 1680

Charles II managed to get along with Parliament, but his son, James II, was openly Catholic and insisted on his divine right to rule. Parliament put up with it as long as his heir was his Protestant daughter, Mary. But when James fathered a son and let it be known that he was planning to raise him as a Catholic, once again the English rebelled. In 1688, James fled to France. Parliament declared the throne vacant and invited Mary and her husband, William of Orange, to come over from Holland and assume the throne jointly.

William and Mary

William and Mary

William was the head of state (stadtholder) of Holland, and had become a Protestant hero in his successful defense of his homeland in a long war with Louis XIV, the Catholic king of France. Nevertheless, Parliament made it clear that William and Mary would be ruling England as Parliament's guest, and passed the English Bill of Rights in 1689 to guarantee the rights of the English people. When William, then Mary, then her sister Anne died childless, Parliament invited the sturdily unimaginative and reliably Protestant George, Elector of the German state of Hanover, to take the throne in 1714. The Hanovers were happy to serve as figureheads while Parliament ran the government, and George's descendants have ruled England ever since.

King George I, Sir Godfrey Kneller

Sir Godfrey Kneller, King George I, 1716

Discovery And Science It is ironic that a time of such tumult was also a time of great discovery. The new world was explored in greater detail, and the French, Dutch, and English joined the Spanish and Portuguese in the race to settle the New World. Coffee, chocolate, and tobacco became the rage in Europe. European traders grew rich from the triangle trade, whereby manufactured goods were traded to ports in West Africa for slaves, who were sold in America for sugar (usually in the form of molasses and often processed into rum), which was sold again in Europe to buy more manufactured goods. Protecting the trade from pirates and rival powers became an important part of the foreign policy of European nations, and in the 1700s it would result in a long and protracted war, mainly between England and France.

Map of the World, De Witt

A. F. De Witt, Map of the World, 1688

The 1600s also saw a continuation of the scientific revolution. Galileo (1564-1642) used his telescope to prove the heliocentric nature of the solar system. He also disproved the Aristotelian notion that that different weighted bodies moved according to different laws and replaced it with the idea that all bodies are heavy and move according to the same physical laws. Isaac Newton (1642-1727) built upon Galileo's work, described the Law of Gravity, and demonstrated the concept of inertia- an object in motion remains in motion, and an object in stasis remains in stasis, unless acted upon by an outside force.

Sir Isaac Newton, Godfrey Kneller

Godfrey Kneller, Sir Isaac Newton, 1689

Aristotle had taught that matter was continuous and made up of the elements earth, air, fire, and water. In 1661, Robert Boyle (1627-1691) postulated that matter was made up of atoms that combined to create intricate chemical combinations. Anton van Leeuwenhoek (1632-1723) used the same glass-grinding techniques that he used to make spectacles to craft the first microscope and used it to demonstrate the existence of "animalcules"-microscopic plants and animals.

Anton van Leeuwenhoek, Jan Verkolje

Jan Verkolje, Anton van Leeuwenhoek, 1673

Robert Hooke (1635-1703) used the microscope to further explore the composition of plants and animals and used the word "cell" for the first time to describe the basic unit of life. Breakthroughs were made in human anatomy, and William Harvey (1578-1657) demonstrated that arteries and veins circulated blood in a single, ceaseless system.
