Architecture Louis XIV's Palace of Versailles is a perfect example of the highly ornamented, "going too far" Baroque style. Baroque architecture is filled with action. The logical patterns of the Renaissance were abandoned for more flamboyant techniques: straight lines were replaced with broken ones, domes became more irregularly shaped (the so-called "onion" domes), and exteriors were covered with decoration...

Monastery At Melk Austria

Monastery at Melk, Austria

Baroque interiors were also elaborate and ornamental, often employing a technique known as trompe l'oeil (deceive the eye) that was used to create an illusion of depth. Sometimes walls were painted with murals that were designed to look like relief sculptures, or even to look like another room.

Saint James Cathedral

St. James Cathedral, Innsbruck, Austria

Ornamentation is also a striking feature of St. Peters Basilica, the world's largest church, completed in Rome during the early Baroque era. A major contributor to the interior of the building was the sculptor/architect Gian Lorenzo Bernini (1598-1680). His work marks the altar of St. Peter, giant twisted columns supporting a massive bronze canopy. The emphasis is on action and movement. No longer does a simple straight line seem adequate.

Bernini High Altar

Gianlorenzo Bernini, The High Altar (Baldacchino) of St. Peter's

Sculpture In the film on Versailles you saw Bernini's bust of Louis XIV, a sort of symphony of curling swelling lines. Here the stone seems to come to life. And why not? Louis was right at the center of this active period. So was Bernini, whose sculptures fill the museums and churches of Rome. The Abduction of Proserpina shows the artist's attention to the details of action. In mythology, Pluto was the god of the underworld, Proserpina the daughter of the goddess of nature. It gets lonely in the underworld, so Pluto decided to take himself a bride; Proserpina was none too happy about the arrangement. The entire piece shows juxtaposed lines emphasizing the struggle of Pluto and Proserpina as he kidnaps her. Notice the splaying of her toes as she kicks the air and the indentations in her flesh where Pluto grips her. Bernini even included a small marble tear to show her emotion.

The Abduction Of Proserpina

Bernini, The Abduction of Proserpina

Painting Baroque painters were still interested in realism, but now they imbued their canvasses with intense emotion as well. An early practitioner of the Baroque style of painting was Michelangelo Caravaggio (1571-1610). Lighting effects are central to his work. You will remember the lighting in his David and Goliath (see Lesson 2). Chiaroscuro may have been invented in the Renaissance, but it was the artists of the Baroque period that brought this technique to its highest level.

In The Crucifixion of St. Peter Caravaggio captures the most active moment, the raising of the cross; again note all of the diagonal lines. Peter, who according to tradition requested upside-down crucifixion so as not to imitate his Savior, dangles precipitously while the executioners strain to heft the cross into place. Caravaggio uses his chiaroscuro like a spotlight, almost as if the scene were taking place in a theater.

Crucifixion Of Saint Peter

Caravaggio, The Crucifixion of St. Peter, 1600-01

In the north, Jan Vermeer was also preoccupied with light. Vermeer painted nearly every one of his more than thirty canvasses in the same room, using a technique that emphasized the play of light within the interior. His Artist in the Studio captures an instant in the creative process, as the curtain within the room is drawn back to reveal a painter and model at work. The entire scene is flooded with a soft light from the window to the left, off the painting.

Artist In His Studio

Jan Vermeer, The Artist in His Studio, 1662-68

Vermeer's fellow northerner, Peter Paul Rubens (1577-1640) became known as a master of color. Even his simple portraits swirled with action. Rubens' figures are larger than life in their musculature, even more than Michelangelo's. With flesh, as with everything else, "going too far" is an apt description.

One of Rubens' greatest achievements is the giant series of paintings he created for Marie de Medicis, Queen of France. Rubens presented her remarkably dull life as a spectacle of heroism, action, and importance. We find actions as simple as getting off a boat becoming festivals of Greek gods, dance concerts, and moments of high drama. This series of paintings is undoubtedly one of the greatest propaganda efforts in the history of art.

Medicis Cycle Paris

Rubens, Medicis Cycle, Paris, 1622-24

Coronation Of Marie De Medicis

Rubens,Coronation of Marie de Medicis, 1622-24

Perhaps the greatest painter of the Baroque era was Rembrandt van Rijn (1606-1669). In a series of remarkable self-portraits, Rembrandt unflinchingly captured his youth, maturity, and old age in all of its graphic detail. Rembrandt used light and color to draw attention to the most important details of his paintings-in this case to his eyes, which reveal to us the greatness of his soul.

Rembrandt Van Rijn Self Portraits

Rembrandt van Rijn, Self-portraits, 1630-69

Rembrandt's paintings were less action-packed than many of the Baroque masters but just as vibrant. In The Night Watch, Rembrandt takes a standard commissioned portrait (The Shooting Company of Captains Willem van Ruytenburch and Frans Banning Cocq) and gives it a sense of forward motion by making a huge converging V and foreshortening Captain Cocq's left arm and Captain Ruytenburch's musket.

night Watch

Rembrandt, The Night Watch, 1642

Rembrandt achieves a similar effect in The Syndics of the Drapers' Guild, another commissioned portrait. Here we feel as if we have just entered the room, interrupting a meeting. All eyes are on us, and the leader of the group rises to greet us.

syndics Of The Clothmakers Guild

Rembrandt, Syndics of the Draper's Guild, 1662

In Rembrandt's last paintings, the old master gives up precision drawing altogether and focuses just on the effects of light and shade. The Return of the Prodigal Son is an impression of a moment, pure emotion in color.

The Return Of The Prodigal Son

Rembrandt, The Return of the Prodigal Son, 1661-69

Close up of the Return Of The Prodigal Son

Rembrandt, The Return of the Prodigal Son, detail, 1661-69
