The year 1871 was a watershed year in the history of Europe. After a crushing defeat in the Franco-Prussian War, the French discarded their Second Empire by overthrowing Emperor Napoleon III and proclaiming the Third Republic. Thus two centuries of French domination of the continent came to an end. George Bernard Shaw is reported to have said that it was a marvelous victory, for the most arrogant and warlike people on the continent had been defeated by the most gentle and peace-loving. A new day had dawned over Europe; the German hour had come. Long divided by religion and politics, the princes and diplomats of Germany now marched into the Hall of Mirrors in the Palace of Versailles and proclaimed their own Second Empire. It was a smugly appropriate place for such a transfer of power.

The German empire painting depicting the rise of the Second Empire

Anton Werner, The German Empire Proclaimed in the Hall of Mirrors, 1877

In many ways, France's defeat in the Franco-Prussian War was as important in ushering in a new era for her as it was for Germany. France had long been the greatest military power on the continent. She was the first great nation-state in the Middle Ages and dominated the political scene during the religious wars of the seventeenth century. Under both Louis XIV, and Napoleon Bonaparte, France's armies had brought confusion and destruction to her enemies. The combined forces of all the nations of Europe finally brought about Napoleon's defeat in 1815, but France quickly recovered and once again became a looming presence. Another revolution in 1848 deposed the last Bourbon monarch and set up a Second Republic. This one, like the First, quickly became an Empire under a member of the Bonaparte family. This time it was Napoleon's nephew, Louis Napoleon Bonaparte, who was crowned Napoleon III (Napoleon I had an infant son who reigned for three weeks when the old emperor abdicated). His Second French Empire was a conscious attempt to capture the glories of the past, and the new Emperor favored art that was as big and bombastic as his ego.

Franz Winterhalter, Emperor Napoleon III, 1855

Franz Winterhalter, Emperor Napoleon III, 1855

But his defeat at the hand of the Germans in 1870 brought an end to these glories. Napoleon was traded for a Third Republic, the pretensions of the Second Empire were abandoned, and French decided that if they could not be the masters of the world militarily, the door was still open to them culturally.

A Revolution In Art These political changes were accompanied by two technological advances that were to permanently change the face of art. The first of these was the invention of the camera. Since the Renaissance, the ideal for a painter was the ability to capture, as accurately and realistically as possible, the form, colors, features, and personalities of the things of the natural world:

painting of a hare (the animal)
Albrecht Dürer, A Hare, 1502

The camera changed all of that. Henceforth, no painter would ever be able to compete with this device for sheer accuracy and lifelike imitation. Painters would have to find some other purpose if the art form was to survive.

The second technical invention was oil paint in metal tubes. Up to this time, painters had to mix their own paint, and since it would dry in a few hours they could only make enough for immediate use. This tied artists to their studios. But now a painter could easily pack a kit, throw in his tubes of paint, and head for the countryside.

Both of these changes are reflected in the work of a group of 19th century painters that have come to be known as the Impressionists. This group centered on the work of Edouard Manet (1832-83), whose avowed purpose was to rid painting of any practice that he considered stale and meaningless. Conventional painters of Manet's day claimed that they had discovered the secret of representing nature; Manet believed that this claim was based on a misconception. Traditional painting, he believed, represented men or objects under very artificial conditions-models posing in the light of a studio, and the painter using the interplay between light and shade to create a sense of solidity and roundness:

Jean-Baptiste-Siméon Chardin, Still life with plums, 1730

Jean-Baptiste-Siméon Chardin, Still life with plums, 1730

The public had become so accustomed to this manner of representation that they forgot that things don't really appear this way in real life. In real life, Manet believed, the contrasts between light and shade were not nearly so even. The lit parts are much brighter than in the studio, and the unlit parts are dappled into various shades of gray. According to Manet, "if we look nature in the open, we do not see individual objects each with its own colour but rather a bright medley of tints which blend in our eye or really in our mind." This same holds true with line: the old paintings were concerned to show all details of all the subjects with equal attention. But Manet realized that in reality, the eye does not see things that way. In fact, the eye tends to focus on only a small region, and the rest of its view tends to be blurred and unclear.

Still life with plums painting, portrait of wine, fruit, and bread sitting on a table
Manet, A bar at the Folies-Bergeres, 1882

Manet's painting, which abandoned the principle of mellow shading in favor of strong and harsh contrasts, caused an outcry among traditional artists. In 1863, the academic painters refused to show his work at an exhibition at the Paris Salon. Following an uproar, the authorities showed all the condemned works in a special show that they called the "Salon of the Rejected." Among the painters who joined Manet was Claude Monet (1840-1926). Monet urged his friends to abandon the studio once and for all, and never to paint a single stroke except for in front of the "motif," or subject. He had a little boat fitted out as a studio to allow him to explore the moods and effects of river scenery. Manet painted him in this attitude:

Bar at the Folies-Bergeres painting shows a woman in a black dress at a bar, mirror behind her shows the people served.
Manet, Monet working in his boat, 1874

Monet's demands that a painting be finished on the spot not only changed the painters work environment, but changed the ideals of painting. In order to catch a fleeting moment, the painter had no time to mix and match colors, but rather paint them in rapid strokes, abandoning detail in favor of a general effect. While this apparently sloppy approach enraged the critics, it enabled Monet to see things with a new set of eyes. It was this new style that was called Impressionism, after one of Monet's paintings: Impression: Sunrise.

Monet working in his boat painting
Monet, Impression: Sunrise, 1872

Monet became famous for his landscapes, but others of his associates applied the same principles to other subjects. Auguste Renoir (1841-1919) captured the gay life of the Parisians of his day, still mostly interested in the medley of colors and effect light has as it dapples the faces and dress of the swirling crowd.

Here only the heads of some of the people in the foreground are shown with any detail, but even then they are depicted in an unconventional manner. The eyes and forehead of the sitting lady are in the shadow, while the sunlight plays on her mouth and chin. Beyond, the figures are increasingly dissolved in light and air.

Renoir, Dance at the Moulin de Galette, 1876

Renoir, Dance at the Moulin de Galette, 1876

The joy of looking at an Impressionist painting is to step back a few paces and watch the brushstrokes fall into place and come to life before our eyes. Impressionism is the art of giving the eye only the minimum of what it needs to fill in the blanks. The picture it creates is not so much on the canvas, but in the mind:

Camille Pissaro, The Boulevard des Italiens, morning, sunlight, 1897

Camille Pissaro, The Boulevard des Italiens, morning, sunlight, 1897

In the end it took little to convince the public that Impressionism was a valuable technique, and the works of Impressionistic artists became some of the most admired paintings in history. The critics who derided them were shown to be short-sighted, and art criticism as a profession suffered a stunning blow. Moreover, the success of this group of experimentalists encouraged even more dramatic experimentation, and modernism, the idea that a work of art's primary purpose was to do something new, was incalculably strengthened. The struggle of the Impressionists became one of the most treasured legends in the history of the art, and future innovators can always point to the failure of the public to understand their work. Soon, this very misunderstanding became a stock in trade for artists everywhere, even to the point where artists and critics alike began to believe that the wider an artwork's appeal, the less valid it was.

Symbolist Poetry A parallel to Impressionism was the symbolist movement in poetry. Like Impressionism, symbolism sought to transfer thoughts and feelings from the mind of the poet directly to the mind of the reader. Symbolists sought to use words not as concrete ideas, but rather as symbols that summoned up various emotional connections. These emotions were often rather disconnected, and logic and descriptive narrative took a back seat or were ignored completely. Paul Verlaine (1844-1896) is regarded as one of the pre-eminent Symbolist poets.

The Boulevard des Italiens, morning, sunlight painting showing a city street with carriages and people bustling about
Gustave Courbet, Paul Verlaine, 1871

Many of his poems speak of ennui, a kind of depressed boredom that sets in once all passions have been sated and all desires met. This feeling is characteristic of the post-Romantic age: after all the sound and fury of Wagner and his disciples, many artists were left feeling a bit empty. In Il pleure dans mon coeur (There is weeping in my heart), Verlaine uses rain as a symbol for this kind of pointless melancholy.

Lyrics
Il pleure dans mon coeur

Comme il pleut sur la ville.

Quelle est cette langueur

Qui pénètre mon coeur?

There is weeping in my heart

Like the rain falling on the town.

What is this languor

That pervades my heart?

O bruit doux de la pluie,

Par terre et sur les toits!

Pour un coeur qui s'ennuie,

O le chant de la pluie!

Oh the patter of the rain

On the ground and the roofs!

For a heart growing bored,

Oh the song of the rain!

Il pleure sans raison

Dans ce coeur qui s'écoeure.

Quoi! nulle trahison?

Ce deuil est sans raison.

There is weeping without cause

In this disheartened heart.

What! No betrayal?

There's no reason for this grief.

C'est bien la pire peine, De ne savoir pourquoi, Sans amour et sans haine, Mon coeur a tant de peine.	Truly the worst pain Is not knowing why, Without love or hatred, my heart feels so much pain.
Impressionism In Music Music too had its parallel to Impressionism with the music of Claude Debussy (1860-1918); although, Debussy never applied the term to himself. He preferred to think of himself as a Symbolist.

Claude Debussy, 1860-1918

Claude Debussy, 1860-1918

Nevertheless, his music with its whole tone and pentatonic scales, its ninth and eleventh chords, its parallel fifths and octaves, and its colorful orchestration, created a hazy, dreamy sound that paralleled the tiny brushstrokes and gray shading of visual Impressionism. Its ambiguity towards tonality is much the same impulse as the Impressionists' blurring of line and color.

Prelude à l'apres-midi d'un faun

(Prelude to the Afternoon of a Faun) is one Debussy's most Impressionistic works. It is an orchestral work based on a literary text-a poem by Stéphane Mallarmé (1842-1898), another important symbolist poet:

These nymphs, I would perpetuate them. So bright Their crimson flesh that hovers there, light In the air drowsy with dense slumbers. Did I love a dream? My doubt, mass of ancient night, ends extreme In many a subtle branch, that remaining the true Woods themselves, proves, alas, that I too Offered myself, alone, as triumph, the false ideal of roses.

Film Title: Prelude à l'Apres-Midi d'un Faune (Prelude to the afternoon of a Faun)
