The Industrial Revolution In the last half of the 1700s, Britain was changing. Agriculture had improved through the introduction of crops like potatoes from the Americas and clover as a soil-replenishing feed for cattle. This, coupled with better weather, led to the population doubling in a few decades. This larger population created a greater demand for clothing, iron tools, and fuel. Clothing manufacturing led people to use waterpower to drive large wheel-driven shafts in clothing mills. Wood has been used for fuel and charcoal kilns smelted iron ore, but by the 1700s, the large population had largely deforested the British landscape. Coal seemed to be the perfect answer: it burned hotter than charcoal or wood, and Britain had vast coal deposits. The only problem with coal mining was that once a shaft was more than a couple of feet underground, water would begin to seep in-the deeper the mine, the greater the problem. In the 1700s, a man named Thomas Newcomen devised a way to use coal to make a steam-powered pump to draw water from the ground. A coal-fired boiler turned water to steam which then flowed into a cylinder that was forced upward by pressure. The pressure would raise a beam that powered an underground water pump. As the pressure released, the beam lowered and the process repeated. Thus the use of a coal-fired steam engine made coal much more obtainable.

diagram of Newcomen's steam powered pump
Newcomen's Steam Pump

A few years later, James Watt determined that the Newcomen engine could be made more efficient and useful by mounting the beam on a rotor, thus creating rotating power to do more than pump water-it could power mills and other machinery.

James Watt Steam Engine
James Watt's rotor pump

This takes us back to the coal mines. With so much coal being mined and so much water being pumped out of the mines, the coalfields were rather muddy. This made hauling wagons full of coal from the mines to river barges very difficult. Finally, some clever mine workers came up with the idea of creating a raised rail track for the wagons. The horses had a much easier time pulling wagons along a track than through the thick mud.

Horse pulling a wagon of coal
Horse-drawn rail wagon

These three puzzle pieces then came together in a remarkable way in central England and Wales as clever men like Richard Trevithik, John Stevens, and George Stephenson determined that by mounting the rotor of a Watt engine onto a rail wagon, it could not only propel itself, but other wagons. Stephenson further reasoned that if a locomotive could carry wagons of coal, it ought to be able to carry cars full of people. In the early 1800s he introduced the Rocket, which could achieve speeds of thirty miles per hour. Considering the roadbed and the condition of the rails themselves, thirty miles per hour was fast enough to be dangerous.

Image of a steam locomotive.
Steam Locomotive

The world had changed. No longer was a horse the fastest mode of travel. The railway age broadened people's perception of time and space. The speed with which things could be transported into the city meant that things like dairies and flour mills were no longer needed downtown. Fresh food could come in on the train. Factories no longer needed to be next to rivers. The population of cities exploded as coal-fired factories began to spring up in Europe and the United States. This rapid industrialization of the West changed the nature of nations. Rural populations were smaller since more farming could be done by machine. As these new urban populations crowded into soot-covered cities, it was only natural to long for the "good old days" of farm and home. This emphasis on nature would form an important component of Romanticism, as would the longing for days gone by.

Railroads were only one part of the massive industrial and technological upheaval in the west. This age produced discoverers and innovators as varied as Alfred Nobel, inventor of dynamite; Thomas Edison, inventor of the electric light and phonograph; Florence Nightingale, creator of modern nursing; Louis Pasteur, developer of germ theory; and Marie Curie, a pioneer in the discovery of radiation. It's a small wonder then that the world would be pulled in two competing directions: one an optimism that science and technology can eventually solve every human ill, and the other a wariness of scientific achievement and technology.

Romanticism - The British poet, Lord Byron, defined romanticism as "feeling deeply." When we think of the word romantic we probably think of love stories, and yes, when you're in love you "feel deeply." But romanticism in the arts means much more: it refers to anything that creates a powerful emotional response. Thus, to be in love is emotional, but so is being frightened, excited, proud, angry, vengeful, thrilled, and many other kinds of passion. In the Romantic era, artists sought subjects that provoked strong emotional responses, including nationalism, nature, the supernatural, nostalgia, and unrequited love.

Nationalism - The revolutionary French were dramatically successful in defending their republic against the crown heads of Europe, and then, under Napoleon, in conquering much of Europe and creating the French Empire. Much of the reason for this was the surge of French patriotism that made French soldiers willing to fight and die for their cause; the mercenaries and conscripts of their opposing armies were simply no match for them. But as the rest of Europe began to feel the iron heel of French oppression, patriotism began to spring up in opposition to Napoleon's rule.

The first place Napoleon felt this surging patriotism was in Spain. Napoleon had sent armies to occupy Spain, but Spanish guerilla fighting erupted all over the peninsula. Napoleon tried to crush the rebellion with bitter repression (remember Goya's Executions of the Third of May?), but the more severe his reprisals, the more Spaniards joined the cause of resistance. Goya's Cronos Devouring His Children takes a disturbing image from Greek mythology (the Titan Cronos, fearing his children would overthrow him, devoured them at child birth) and uses it for an allegory of Napoleon's armies devouring all of Eu­rope as he created the French Empire.

Nationalism- Goya painting of Cronos devouring his children
Goya, Cronos Devouring his Children, 1819

In 1812, Napoleon began a devastating invasion of Russia with an enormous army conscripted from all over Europe. The Russian army fell back, but the farther Napoleon penetrated the Russian lands, the more patriotic the Russian people grew. Rather than accept French rule, the people burnt their crops and towns. In October, Moscow fell to the French, but the Russians abandoned the town and burned it to the ground. Faced with the prospect of a hard Russian winter far from his supply base in France, Napoleon began a withdrawal. As he retreated, Russian guerilla fighters surrounded his armies, disrupted his supply lines, and picked off stragglers. The Russian winter too took a terrible toll, and of the 600,000 troops who entered Russia in summer of 1812, less than a 100,000 ever came out again.

Painting of Napoleon's Retreat from Moscow, his soldiers are trudging through the snow and all appear to be very cold. A few bodies on the trail.
Adolf Northen, Napoleon's Retreat from Moscow, 1851

German nationalism too was born under the Napoleonic heel. Germany had been a non-nation since the end of the Middle Ages and consisted of over 300 independent political entities, led in the north by Prussia and in the south by Austria. After defeating the Austrians at Austerlitz in 1805 and the Prussians at Jena-Auerstadt in 1806, Napoleon reorganized Germany into the German Confederation, a loose collection of about thirty states that he intended to dominate. When he invaded Russia, tens of thousands of conscripted German troops went with him. After his defeat, he found the Germans in revolt in his rear. As the Russians approached the German frontier, the Prussian General Yorck was ordered to bar their way across Prussian territory. Instead, Yorck disobeyed his orders, left his troops, crossed the ice alone to the Russian army headquarters under a flag of truce, and offered his army to the Russian command. Henceforth, the German states would be among Napoleon's most implacable enemies and join with the rest of Europe in bringing him down in 1815.

With the birth of German nationalism came a fascination with German culture. For instance, there were the brothers Grimm, who spent the years of Napoleonic occupation walking the roads and byways of Germany, collecting folk tales that would come to inspire generations with their stories of love and fear, of monsters and villains and heroes and fair ladies. Clemens Brentano and Achim von Arnim collected folk poetry; their collection, Des Knaben Wunderhorn, would become grist for German song composers' mills for the next century. All of these tales and poems had several things in common, and these have come to be grouped together under the literary rubric of German Romanticism.

Large Furry creature with both hands in the air looking at confident young lad with a strong stance
Arthur Rackham, from the Brothers Grimm's Valiant Little Tailor

The German tales were full of fairies and ogres and giants; they were also full of brave little tailors and other craftsmen who embodied what the Germans thought were their greatest virtues-deep piety, a family-oriented society, a love of homeland and the earth, and a simple, common sense that always triumphed over the proud and shallow upper class. Nature also played an important role in the stories, but it was a nature that was no longer simply background; now it was a living, breathing entity that had a mind and will of its own and often was set in fearful opposition to the will of the mere mortals that inhabited it.

The 19th century thus was the great age of nationalism. New nations were formed based on language and culture, such as the Confederate States of America (1861), Germany (1871) and Italy (1861). Other nations like Poland, Czech, and Hungary were still part of larger empires but yearned for individual identity.

Nature - The industrial revolution pulled more people into cities. It is said that "absence makes the heart grow fonder," and in the Romantic era, city dwellers had a fondness for the absent countryside. People bought paintings of country scenes, went on picnics, and created gardens that imitated the wild countryside. In America, a group of artists known as the Hudson River School celebrated on canvas the majestic wonders of places like Niagara Falls, the Catskills, and the Hudson in upstate New York. Others like Moran and Bierstadt painted the wide-open spaces of the American west. British painters like Turner and Constable and the German Caspar David Friedrich painted rustic scenes of such color and beauty that some view them as almost religious works of art. They are, in fact, a celebration of the great Creator.

Painting of a large mountain with clouds pulling over it, a man on his horse looking small in the grand scene
Thomas Cole, Crawford Notch, 1839

Literature would expand on this theme as writers like Jack London, Herman Melville, William Blake, and William Wordsworth would make dogs, tigers, and whales, and daffodils the main characters in their writings. The late Romantic poet Joyce Kilmer would say, "I think that I shall never see a poem as lovely as a tree."

The Supernatural - We have already noted the fairy tales of the Brothers Grimm. The Romantic era was obsessed with the other-worldly, with ghosts, vampires, witches, curses, sorcerers, and monsters. One of the keynote works of the early Romantic era was Goethe's Faust, about a man who sold his soul to the devil.

Supernatural painting of an angel
Delacroix: Mephistopheles, an illustration from Goethe's Faust, 1828

Other examples include Charles Dickens' A Christmas Carol, Bram Stoker's Dracula, Mary Shelley's Frankenstein, and Edgar Allen Poe's many short stories. Closely tied to this was a fascination with the grotesque, including Victor Hugo's Hunchback of Notre Dame and Verdi's Rigoletto.

Nostalgia - The most obvious evidence of the nostalgia of the 19th Century is found in its architecture. It seemed there were few new building styles, only re-workings of older ones. Parliament in London met in a newly constructed Gothic style building.

Houses of Parliament outside shot
Houses of Parliament, London

The Opera House in Paris blended Roman, Egyptian, and Baroque influences. King Ludwig of Bavaria lived in a palace that was a mixture of several older styles, from Romanesque to Spanish Moorish. Painters and sculptors returned to long ago and far away subjects like Joan of Arc (Ingres), Don Quixote (Daumier), and rural countrysides of pre-industrialized Britain (Constable). The "good old days" were never better than in the minds of a Romantic.

Unrequited Love - It was the American Romantic poet Tennyson who wrote, "It is better to have loved and lost than never to have loved at all." The powerful emotions associated with unreturned-or unachievable-love are popular themes in Romantic art, music and literature. In a combination of both the nostalgic and the unachievable, Romeo and Juliet become popular subjects for music and painting. Wagner's great Romantic opera was Tristan and Isolde, a medieval tale about one of King Arthur's knights who drank a love potion with Isolde, his master's wife-to-be, dooming them both to hopeless and endless yearning.

A knight and a woman looking intently into each others eyes holding a golden cup, clearly in love with each other
John William Waterhouse, Tristan and Isolde, 1916
