As you have learned, one of the most distinguishing characteristics of Baroque music was the belief that music had the ability and purpose of moving the emotions -- the Doctrine of Affections. The texture of Baroque music was generally that of a duet between a melody and an active bass line. The rest of the harmonies were usually filled in chords played by a harpsichord or some other instrument capable of playing harmony. Since the bass and harmonies played continuously regardless of what instruments or voices were carrying the melody, the style was called basso continuo. Baroque melodies were often ornamented, meaning that the performers improvised notes than were not written on the page. By the middle part of the 1600s, Baroque music was tonal, meaning that its chords and melodic figures clearly outlined a strong sense of home key.

Handel If any art form is renowned for going too far, it is opera, and the first operas mark the beginning of the Baroque era. The first opera composers were interested in recreating ancient Greek theater, which was both sung by choruses and declaimed by soloists in a heightened, song-like kind of speech. Baroque operas featured two kinds of singing: recitative, where the words are clearly enunciated in a speech-like manner with simple accompaniment; and aria, where the music becomes more important and seeks to explore a single emotion of the character. Operas also featured other ensembles, choruses, instrumental preludes, interludes, and postludes, and ballet. A popular opera composer, George Frederick Handel (1685-1759) was born in Germany and schooled in Italy, but settled in England as a composer of Italian operas. When Italian opera went out of fashion in England in the 1730s, Handel turned to oratorio, a kind of non-staged opera on a religious subject. His most famous oratorio is Messiah, a celebration of Christ's birth, death, and resurrection.

Handel

George Frideric Handel

The text of Messiah comes from the King James Version of the Bible, much of it from the Old Testament. It is in three parts; the first deals with the prophecies and birth of Christ; the second of his death and resurrection; and the third of man's hope for redemption and resurrection as a result of Christ's mission. It has recitatives and arias in the operatic style, sung by a soprano, alto, tenor, and bass soloist, and choruses sung by a four-part choir. The entire work is accompanied by an orchestra.

Near the beginning, the tenor soloist sings the words from Isaiah that prophesy of the mission of John the Baptist:

Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, saith your God.
Speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her
That her warfare is accomplished,
That her iniquity is pardoned.
The voice of him that crieth in the wilderness,
Prepare ye the way of the Lord,
Make straight in the desert a highway for our God.
Every valley shall be exalted,
And every mountain and hill made low:
The crooked straight,
And the rough places plain.

Title: Messiah, "Comfort Ye My People and Every Valley"

Soloist: Jerry Hadley

Composer: George Frideric Handel


(05:45 mins, "Comfort Ye My People" TranscriptLinks to an external site.)

Handel sets the first two stanzas in the style of recitative. At first we hear the orchestra play a simple, pulsing accompaniment. When the tenor enters (#1), he sings the first phrase by himself. The orchestra then imitates him (#2). When the tenor sings again, his melody is simple and speech-like, with only one note for every syllable. While he sings, the orchestra plays the pulsing accompaniment (#3). This style of recitative is called accompagato (accompanied). At one point, the orchestra drops out while the tenor freely sings "Comfort ye" (#4), but then the pulsing pattern resumes. After the first stanza of text, the pulsing orchestra accompaniment drops out and the tenor sings in a looser rhythm; here the orchestra simply punctuates the tenor's melody with single chords that act like commas and periods (#5). This style of recitative is called secco (dry).

After the recitative, the tenor sings an aria for the third stanza of text (#6-"Every Valley Shall Be Exalted"). The accompaniment is much more active, and the vocal line features many melismas (many notes on a single syllable of text). Melismas are typical of Baroque arias. You'll notice that the tenor sings the same words over and over again. This allows Handel to write music that is not restricted by the limits of the text. At the same time, this aria features much word painting, where the music imitates some aspect of the words. At one point (#7), for example, the tenor sings a long melisma on the word "exalted"; to paint the word, Handel writes a repeating pattern that moves higher and higher. On the word "low" the tenor sings the lowest note of the phrase (#8). On the word "crooked" the notes move up and down (#9), and on the word "plain" the tenor sings a series of long, held notes (#10).

All of these melismas are the aural manifestation of all the ornamental splendor that we shall observe in the Palace of Versailles. In fact, singers of the day were not satisfied with all of the melismas that Handel wrote. They had to put in their own to make the piece even more melismatic. Near the end of the aria (#11) Handel slows down the tempo in order to allow the singer to put in a cadenza, a melismatic passage that the tenor makes up on the spot and uses to show off his vocal ability. Going too far? Not if you love great singing.

The most famous chorus in Messiah comes at the end of Part II and celebrates the resurrection of Christ. "Hallelujah" is adapted from the Revelation of St. John:

Hallelujah!
For the Lord God omnipotent reigneth.
The kingdom of this world is become
The kingdom of our Lord, and of his Christ.
And he shall reign forever and ever.
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.

Title: Messiah, "Hallelujah"

Conductor: Sir Colin Davis

Orchestra: London Symphony Orchestra

Composer: George Frideric Handel


(03:49 mins, "Hallelujah Chorus" TranscriptLinks to an external site.)

After a short introduction in the orchestra, the choir sings several repetitions of the words "Hallelujah" with the strings echoing the rhythmic pattern. After a brief introduction, the chorus and orchestra state a powerful theme in unison (#1) on the words "For the Lord God omnipotent reigneth." Handel punctuates the line with more hallelujahs; notice how the word is even more jubilant with the addition of timpani and trumpets (#2). The theme is repeated in unison (#3), then sopranos (#4), basses (#5), and tenors (#6) sing it in turn while the other voices add hallelujahs in polyphony.

Then Handel calms things down (#7). "The kingdom of this world is become" is piano and peaceful, but then "The kingdom of our Lord and of his Christ" is forte and grand again. The basses start a new theme (#8) with "And he shall reign forever and ever." Each voice sings the theme in turn then continues on, adding to polyphony. The altos sing a sustained "King of Kings and Lord of Lords" (#9) while the rest of the chorus responds like a crowd cheering them on with "Forever and ever, hallelujah, hallelujah!" Notice the little trumpet solo that breaks through (#10), just before the sopranos take the theme over, raising it higher and higher. Following the climax (#11) there is a softer polyphonic section, then the basses again state the "King of Kings" theme again (#12). Finally the trumpets come in again (#13), and the crescendo to the finale begins. Just before the end everything stops suddenly as if astonished (#14), then all join together in one final "Hallelujah!"

Vivaldi During the Baroque era, instrumental music became as important as vocal music; in fact, it was the golden age of the violin. Violinmakers like Amati and Stradivari created the finest examples of their kind, and composers like Corelli and Vivaldi wrote music that highlighted the special abilities of the instrument. The sonata was a multi-movement instrumental work for either solo violin with basso continuo (solo sonata), or two violins with basso continuo (trio sonata). A concerto was a large work for full orchestra, with contrasting sections played by a solo instrument (solo concerto) or small group (concerto grosso).

Antonio Vivaldi (1678-1741) wrote nearly 500 concertos, mostly for violins and other string instruments. For most of his life Vivaldi worked at Venice's Ospedale della pietà, a school for orphan girls. Vivaldi's all-girl orchestra was one of the best in Europe, allowing him to write vast amounts of virtuosic music for string instruments.

Vivaldi

Antonio Vivaldi

Vivaldi's most famous work is the Four Seasons, four three-movement concertos, each about a different season of the year. Each movement follows a specific form that had become standard for concertos. First we hear a main theme played by the full orchestra. This theme is called a ritornello because it keeps returning throughout the movement. The ritornellos are interspersed with passages for the soloists. Notice, however, that the basso continuo, the cello and harpsichord, play throughout (hence continuo). For concertos that are played in major keys, the first ritornello is in the tonic key, then the soloists move to the dominant. At the end the final ritornello is back in the tonic. This gives the piece a sense of journey, of departure, and return.

Title: The Four Seasons, "Spring"

Conductor: Itzhak Perlman

Orchestra: Israel Philharmonic Orchestra

Solist: Itzhak Perlman

Composer: Antonio Vivaldi


(03:17 mins, "Four Seasons" TranscriptLinks to an external site.)

The first movement of Spring begins with a spritely ritornello in two phrases, each played twice, that we will call a (#1) and b (#2). Notice that a and b are exactly the same length, and that a asks a question and b answers it. In music, this is called a parallel period. The a phrase is only played at the beginning of the concerto. Each time the ritornello comes back throughout the concerto we will only hear the b phrase.

After the first ritornello, the two violin soloists play a little section (#3) that sounds like birds calling and responding to each other. The full orchestra comes in again for the ritornello (#4), and then we hear a new theme (#5), gentle as a spring breeze. Notice how busy and active the cellos are, and at one place they sound like the buzzing of bees (#6). Meanwhile Vivaldi has changed keys on us on our walk through the spring meadows, and the next ritornello (#7) is in the dominant.

Then, just as our walk has taken us farthest from home, a thundershower begins. The low strings are the thunder (#8) while the high strings punctuate the rumbles with streaks of lightning (#9). Then the first violin plays a solo that represents the falling rain (#10). Totally soaked, the key moves to the minor for a dismal ritornello (#11). But then the sun starts to come out again (#12), and the soloists move us back home to the tonic key for one last major-key ritornello (#13).

J.S. Bach Notice that in both Messiah and The Four Seasons the harpsichord plays with the strings throughout-this is the harmonic continuo that we talked about earlier. The Baroque era was important for the development of keyboard instruments like the harpsichord and the organ (the piano was invented near the end of the Baroque period and will become important for the Classical era). Undoubtedly the greatest composer of the Baroque era, and probably the greatest organist of his time, was Johann Sebastian Bach (1685-1750).

Bach

Johann Sebastian Bach

Bach was born in Eisenach, Germany, the same year as Handel and only a few miles away, although, there is no evidence that the two composers ever met. Handel had a cosmopolitan life, working in Italy and England, while Bach seldom strayed more than thirty or so miles from where he was born. Bach spent most of his life working as an organist and music director for various Lutheran churches. Nearly every one of his manuscripts bears the dedication: "To the glory of the most high God and for the instruction of my fellow man."

For the last quarter century of his life, Bach held the position of cantor (music director) at St. Thomas Church in Leipzig, the cultural and theological center of the Lutheran Church. While there, he also was headmaster of the boys' school and taught the boys music, mathematics, and theology. Bach was married twice and raised twenty children to adulthood. Each Sunday of the year he was expected to compose, rehearse, and direct a new cantata, a twenty to thirty minute musical work for chorus, orchestra, and soloists, based on meditative texts drawn from the scripture reading for the day.

Bach also composed much music for the organ. An organist in Bach's day was expected to be able to improvise, or make up on the spot, organ preludes, postludes, and interludes in the worship service. Bach found that most of his contemporaries were not as gifted in improvisation as he was, and so he wrote a number of organ works to show them how it was done. If Bach were to witness us today performing one of these pieces, he would probably cluck his tongue in disapproval and tell us we should improvise our own music.

Bach created many of his organ works in pairs. The first piece of the pair was called a toccata or prelude. The word toccata means "to touch," and the idea was that the organist had just sat down at the keys and needed to warm up. So Bach wrote things that sound like finger exercises-scales, arpeggios, and the like-to start the piece off. Again the aim was to sound improvisatory, like someone is making it up on the spot.

But Bach never did anything by halves, and most toccatas require the organist to do more than "touch" the keys. Bach had little patience for musicians who had not paid the price in discipline and dedication to develop their technique. At one point, a listener complimented him and told him his finger work was extraordinary; Bach replied, "There is nothing extraordinary about it. All you have to do is touch the right key at the right time and the instrument plays itself." To a student he said, "Just practice diligently and you will do very well. You have five fingers on each hand just as healthy as mine." Today we think of someone like Bach as a genius, someone with gifts that are far beyond the norm. But to Bach, genius was created by diligent practice.

A toccata or prelude was usually paired with a composition called a fugue. A fugue is a piece of imitative polyphony, a learned, difficult piece to compose and play (much less improvise). As with a concerto, a fugue starts in the tonic, goes on a journey to other keys, and returns home again. But there are two big differences. First, the fugue is based on a single theme, or subject. Second, the fugue is made up of imitative polyphony. The first part of a fugue is called an exposition; here the subject is played in turn (exposed) by each of four voices. After the exposition, the subject often disappears and the music wanders through various keys. This section is called the episodes. At the end, the subject returns in the tonic key; this is called the recapitulation.

Title: Tocata and Fugue in D minor

Organist: Karl Richter

Organ: Ottobeuren Abbey, Bavaria, Germany

Composer: J.S. Bach


(08:49 mins, "Toccata and Fugue in D Minor" TranscriptLinks to an external site.)

The toccata is the first part of the Toccata and Fugue in D minor. Notice that the music keeps starting and stopping, almost as if Bach is coming up with ideas and then setting them aside. Notice too that the organ has multiple keyboards, and that the organist changes from one keyboard to another (see #1). The organ is made up of hundreds of pipes of different shapes and sizes, some made out of wood and other made up of metal. This gives them different pitches, volumes, and timbres. The organist controls what pipes are played by pulling out or pushing in the stops that surround the keyboards. By setting stops for different keyboards the organist can select how loud or soft, how bright or dark, how light or heavy he wants the organ to sound. For this toccata, Bach keeps the organist's hands so busy that he needs an assistant to run the stops for him. (In Bach's day, the organist would also have needed a boy to pump the bellows that sent air through the pipes. Now they are run by an electric motor.)

At the beginning of the fugue (#2), the subject is introduced in a single voice. A second voice then comes in (#3) and states the subject at a higher pitch. While the second voice plays the subject, the first voice plays something else, called a countersubject, that creates harmonic polyphony, or counterpoint, with the subject. The two voices play with each other for a few bars, and then a third voice enters (#4). The three voices play together long enough that we begin to think that this is going to be all there is, but then a fourth voice enters in the low bass pedals (#5). As an organist Bach was famous for his pedal work, and his works demand great facility with the feet.

By the end of the exposition we are in the major key (#6). We start out with a short reference to the subject, but then it disappears altogether, and we run through a number of episodes (#7). The subject comes back for a moment (#8), and we might think we are at the recapitulation, but Bach does not follow through and there are more episodes. During all of this, notice how many times the organist and his assistant change keyboards and stops. As a young man Bach studied Vivaldi's concertos and acquired a taste for the contrast between the large and small groups of the orchestra and for the various instruments. Here Bach imitates that contrast in his organ.

Soon we can see the organist's assistant pulling out stops (#9), and we can guess that something is in the air. We also hear the key heading for home. The recapitulation begins (#10), but now the voices don't wait politely for each voice to finish their turn at the subject. Instead, they pile up on top of each other in a style called stretto, which means "worried." The whole effect from here on out will be to drive the music to a dramatic ending. Fingers and feet are flying; we see the assistant pulling out the biggest stops (#11), the ones that will bring to bear the longest, lowest, and most powerful pipes in the organ. This is in preparation for a virtuosic pedal solo (#12). Bach also uses the pedal to repeat the tonic note over and over again (#13)-this is called a pedal tone-creating what seems like an irresistible force that drives all the disparate elements of the fugue towards an inevitable conclusion.

Just when you think it's over (#14) Bach sounds a surprising chord (called a deceptive cadence) that deprives us of the ending, and Bach returns to the toccata style with more scales, arpeggios, and wild-sounding chords. This has the same effect as a cadenza in an operatic aria or concerto. It sounds improvisational and is the most virtuosic playing in piece. Finally it crashes to an end, a wild and almost frightening revelation of Bach's Dionysian side.

By the time Bach died, his style of music was already out of favor -- Bach's contemporaries considered him hopelessly baroque. Soon, his music would be forgotten, to await rediscovery seventy-five years later when the Romantic era once again stirred the passions of listeners and made them yearn for the kind of expression that was at the heart of the Baroque.
