Reading
Debussy's reaction to tonality was a rebellion against the German dominance of music in Europe from Beethoven to Wagner. The French were revolted by the triumphant bombast of Wagner's operas (his crowing over the French defeat in the stupid little pamphlet Das Kapitulation did not help his popularity), and they sought a new, more reserved, more sophisticated mode of expression. In this case, tonality was the baby thrown out with the bathwater. A general impression existed that Wagner's hyper-chromaticism had exhausted the possibilities of tonality, and that whatever future music had, it was in a different direction. This is why Debussy routinely used non-tonal scales, such as the pentatonic or whole tone; chords that had so many notes that they undermined any sense of chord function; and chord successions that did not follow the established rules of tonal music theory. As a student in the Paris Conservatory, he was challenged about one of his compositions-what rules, he was asked, accounted for the unorthodox music he had written? His response set the tone for everything that was to follow: "Mon plaisir," was his response. "My pleasure."

The Post-Impressionists In a similar way, the Impressionists are sometimes thought of as the first of the "modern" artists because they defied certain rules of painting. But it is well to remember that their aims for art were much as they had been since the late Middle Ages-to make as faithful a replica of the things of the natural world as possible. All of their innovations aimed at creating a more perfect replica of the visual impression. They were so successful that some artists felt that there was no more to achieve along those lines. As a young man, Paul Cezanne (1839-1906) took part in the Impressionist exhibitions, but became so disgruntled with the critical reaction that he went back to his hometown in the south of France and refused to engage the public any more. He was wealthy enough that he did not need to sell his paintings, and thus could dedicate his whole life to solving problems he perceived with the art of painting. Cezanne admired both the form and unity of the classic painters and the Impressionists' ability to paint from nature. The problem, as he saw it, was to find a way to combine the two values. How could the hazy outlines and flickering light of the Impressionists not bring about the breakdown of form and structure? In simpler language, Impressionistic pictures tended to be brilliant but messy. Cezanne hated messiness, but still longed for strong, intense color. How could he be faithful to his visual impressions of nature, and still create works of form and balance? In the end, he kept the color and free brushwork of the Impressionists, and imposed upon it the order of regular geometric patterns:

Image of Mont St Victoire Seen From Bellevue painting.

Cezanne, Mont St. Victoire seen from Bellevue, 1885

Here Cezanne carefully arranges his landscape to create a balanced and symmetrical presentation of a natural scene, awash with color. Central to his presentation are the geometrical shapes of the houses. In the following still life, the bowl is distorted to fill the otherwise empty space on the left and the table is tipped to better display the fruit. Neither the apples nor the cloth show any interest in detailed textures. Instead, the emphasis is on shape and color:

Image of Still Life painting.

Cezanne, Still Life, 1890

To create form, Cezanne sacrificed the conventional "correctness of outline." His indifference to "correct" drawing gave impetus to modernism in art.

Georges Seurat (1859-91) reduced Impressionistic brushstrokes down to tiny dots, hoping that it would lead to the blending of colors by the eye, or rather the mind, without the colors losing their brightness. This technique, called Pointillism, broke up all contours into tiny dots, forcing him to simplify his forms beyond anything that Cezanne had imagined. In this famous painting, people are mostly shown in plain profile, almost in the fashion of the ancient Egyptians, and the painting consists primarily of a series of horizontal and vertical lines:

Image of Sunday Afternoon painting.

Seurat, Sunday Afternoon on the Island of La Grande-Jatte, 1884-86

Vincent Van Gogh (1853-1890) was a Dutchman who went to the south of France, supported by his brother Theo. There he isolated himself and worked feverishly, writing letters to Theo that told of his "artist's sense of mission, his struggle and triumphs, his desperate loneliness and longing for companionship."

[1]

After less than a year he broke down and was hospitalized in a mental asylum; a year later he took his own life. In the meantime, he continued to paint whenever his fluctuating sanity would let him. Now his paintings are very popular in colored reproductions and can be seen in everyday places:

Image of the Sunflowers panting.

Van Gogh, Sunflowers, 1888

He would have wanted that, for his goal was to create an "unsophisticated art which would … give joy and consolation to every human being." Van Gogh had absorbed the small brushstrokes of Impressionism, but he used them not only to break up the color but to convey his own excitement. With Van Gogh, the heavy brushstrokes are the exaltation of the artist's mind. He lays on the color thick like a writer who underlines his words:

Thatched Houses in Cordeville image.

Van Gogh, Thatched houses in Cordeville, 1890

Like Cezanne and the Impressionists, Van Gogh painted the sun and landscapes, but also humble, simple things:

Painting of Artists Room.

Van Gogh, The artist's room in Arles, 1888

Van Gogh used colors and forms to convey how he felt about things, rather than attempting to portray them accurately. He would exaggerate or change the shape of things if it suited his emotional purpose. At times the emotion nearly overwhelms the painting, and we feel his encroaching madness:

Painting of wheatfield with crows.

Van Gogh, Wheat fields with crows, 1890

Cezanne abandoned the accurate representation of things in order to explore various forms; Van Gogh to explore emotions. These became two distinct trends in the 20th century-Cubism, or the emphasis on geometric forms, and Expressionism, or the distortion of things to present powerful emotions. The thing they both have in common is the abandonment of art as an imitation of nature, or at least the modification of it.

Paul Gaugin (1848-1903) represents a third trend. He became convinced that Western art was too reliant on skill and craftsmanship and sought a return to nature. At first he studied folk art, but it wasn't enough for him. So he abandoned his wife, family, and job and moved to Tahiti and lived among the islanders. There he studied native forms and imitated them in his painting. To his contemporaries, they seemed primitive, and this was just what he wanted. His simplified outlines and large patches of strong color helped him portray the unspoiled intensity of what he called "nature's children":

Tahitian Woman on the Beach painting.

Gaugin, Tahitian Women on the Beach, 1891

This Primitivism was to become an important part of the aesthetic of the early 20th century. One of the most influential Primitivists was the composer, Igor Stravinsky (1882-1971). Russian born, Stravinsky went to Paris as a young man and achieved international fame as composer for Sergei Diaghilev's Ballet Russe (Russian Ballet). His 1913 ballet, The Rite of Spring, provoked a riot at its première. Depicting various scenes from pagan ritual, the work features sharp dissonances and intense rhythms with abruptly shifting accents. The choreography too was unconventional; the audience, used to the long and graceful lines of classical ballet, was shocked by the angular movement centered more on the pelvis than the feet.

Title: Le Sacre Du Printemps (The Rite of Spring) Choreography: Vaslav Nijensky Composer: Igor Stravinsky Ballet Company: Joffrey Ballet 1989 Orchestra: Orchestra of the National Theatre Prague Conductor: Allan Lewis 
(10:00 mins, "Rite of Spring (1 of 3)" TranscriptLinks to an external site. )

From the very beginning of the performance, the audience began to hiss and boo loudly, as the strident bassoon solo, pitched unusually high, clashed with the dissonant accompaniment. According to legend, the composer Camille Saint-Saëns stormed out of the performance, incensed by the misuse of the bassoon. Soon there were loud arguments going on in the audience between those who loved what they saw and heard and those who hated it. People stood on chairs and yelled and threw things at the dancers, who were unable to hear the music, so that the director had to shout out the choreography from the wings. Stravinsky reportedly left the theater in mid-performance weeping, but Diaghilev, a Russian art critic, later said that the riot was just what Stravinsky had wanted. Any publicity, apparently, is good publicity.

Modernism Ever since the Renaissance, it had been the artist's most pressing task to paint what he saw. Some called it realism, others naturalism. Either way, the ultimate compliment to an artist was that his work was "lifelike." But the post-Impressionists saw realism as an impasse-from now on, nobody was going to be able to make things look any more realistic than had been done in the past. As a result, they lost interest in the "truth to nature" and "ideal beauty" that had obsessed Western artists. Instead they sought for what they believed Western art had lost-"intense expressiveness, clarity of structure, and a forthright simplicity of technique."[1] These three things correspond to Expressionism, Cubism, and Primitivism respectively. The artists of the next century, therefore, would strive not for mastery as had the artists of the past, but for originality. Any departure from tradition that interested the critics was greeted as a new "ism" to which the future would belong. That each new trend may last a very short time did not seem to matter. What mattered was the freedom to experiment, to discover new vistas, to break down the old boundaries. This new outlook on art was given a new, collective "ism"-modernism.

Expressionism was one of these new "isms." We have already seen it at work in the paintings of Van Gogh, when he exaggerated a line or color to express a particular emotion. Expressionism uses many of the techniques of caricature, which plays with the features of its victim and distorts them to express how the artist feels about him, usually in a humorous fashion. But in Expressionism, the artist is deadly serious. One of the first Expressionists was Edvard Munch (1863-1944). In The Scream (1895), Munch explores how a sudden agitation transforms all sensory experience:

Image of The Scream painting.

Munch, The Scream, 1895

All the lines in the painting lead toward a single focus, the shouting head, making it look as if the scenery shares in the anguish of the scream. The face is distorted like a caricature: in fact, it summons darker feelings, with it skull shape and staring eyes and hollow cheeks. We can tell by looking at the picture that something terrible has happened, and it is all the more disturbing because we don't know what it is. The public often revolted against Expressionism (and still does) because the distortion makes things uglier than they really are. But Munch might have replied that human anguish is ugly, and it is disingenuous only to show the bright side. In fact, the Expressionist's primary concern was to face the stark facts of life, create compassion for the disinherited and downtrodden, and to shock the prosperous class out of its complacency.

Käthe Kollwitz (1867 1945) created moving prints and drawings mainly to create a sensation. Her March of the Weavers is from a series of illustrations, from a play dealing with the plight of Silesian textile workers:

March of the Weavers image. 

Kollwitz, March of the Weavers, 1897

The set of illustrations was nominated to receive a gold medal, but the government minister in charge recommended against it "in view of the subject of the work and of its naturalistic execution, entirely lacking in mitigating or conciliatory elements." This, of course, is what Kollwitz wanted. She was intent on showing that the plight was so great that the current system was incapable of resolving it. The only way forward was through revolution.

If the imitation of nature is no longer important, and if the main focus is now the expression of feelings through shapes and colors, why not do away with all subject matter entirely? Music, after all, was capable of living its own existence, free of any concrete associations with the natural world. Why could art not do the same? Wassily Kandinsky (1866-1944) wrote a book called Concerning the Spiritual in Art (1912), in which he stressed the psychological effects of pure color, such as the way a bright red pigment can have the same effect as a trumpet call. His paintings are among the first examples of abstract art:

Modern colorful painting.

Kandinsky, Cossacks, 1910-11

Cubism Even more influential was Cubism, which did not seek to abolish representative painting, only to reform it. Artists of the early 20th century perceived a conflict between pattern and solidity. The illusion of solidity comes from shading, which creates a sense of depth. The problem was that once that happens, it is harder to create a pattern. In 1905, a group of young painters called Les Fauves, or the Savages, exhibited in Paris. A leading member was Henri Matisse (1869-1954). He was interested in decorative art and had studied color-schemes of Oriental carpets and North African scenery. La Desserte, 1908, transforms the scene of a woman setting a table into a decorative pattern:

Colorful image of a woman eating.

Matisse, La Desserte, 1908

The patterns on the wallpaper and tablecloth are the main interests of the picture, and even the woman and the scenery in the window conform to the overall design. The natural objects are simplified and distorted to fit the pattern, and little attempt is made to create an illusion of solidity.

Pablo Picasso (1881-1973) was a Spaniard who came to Paris and started by painting subjects that would have interested Expressionists: beggars, outcasts, and circus performers:

Image of an old guitarist.

Picasso, The Old Guitarist, 1903

Soon he began to study primitive forms. His interest was in finding a way to simplify the forms, and yet preserve the sense of solidity and depth. He found inspiration in the words of Cezanne, who once advised a young painter to look at nature in terms of spheres, cones, and cylinders. Picasso took this literally. Rather than shaping things the way they appear in our physical eyes, he sought to present them the way they occur to the mind, which thinks of the various aspects of an object simultaneously. Some aspects stand out clearly; others are distant and blurred. And yet this medley of images represents more of the object than any snapshot or painting from life ever could. In the Violin and Grapes,1912, we see the tuning peg from the side, the holes from the front:

Collage of different string instruments combined.

Picasso, Violin and Grapes, 1912

These are the angles from which we would most characteristically envision them in our minds. The curve of the rim is exaggerated, shaped more like it feels when we hold the violin in our hands. We see the strings twice, once from the top and once from the side. Each piece has depth and solidity, and yet they all form a harmonious design.

The disadvantage of this system was that you had to already know what a violin looked like to appreciate the picture. Cubist painters knew this and chose familiar objects. The point of the painting was to see the piece from many angles, to explore the various aspects of the well-known object. The essential paradox of painting is the attempt to portray three dimensions on a two-dimensional canvas. Cubists sought to not gloss over the paradox, but rather to exploit it.
