Ancient Art (before 500 CE) Art in the most primitive cultures is indistinguishable from magic. Here the boundaries between the mind and the natural world are much fuzzier than we think of them. If a shaman sees a dream or vision of a buffalo, he is likely to report to his fellow tribesmen that a buffalo has visited him. Likewise imaginative acts, like dancing, singing, or sand painting, are thought to influence natural phenomenon. You will remember that the Children of Israel used trumpets and rams horns to bring down the walls of Jericho. The artist(s?) who created the magnificent cave paintings in Lascaux, France, probably intended to influence an upcoming hunt by depicting images of great bounty.

Cave Paintings, Lascaux
Cave Paintings, Lascaux

The Egyptians were a little more sophisticated; their art was intended not to influence the things of this life, but those of the next. Theirs was the art of the tomb, created to bring comforts to their dead. Their art was governed by a rigid system of conventions designed to show in two dimensions the best views of a three-dimensional figure. When considering the face, artists felt that the most representative view was from a profile, but the eyes were best seen from the front. The torso was best from head on, but the legs and feet from the side. The important thing to note is that this style of representation wasn't chosen because it was the best the primitive Egyptian artists could do their paintings show remarkable skill and detail. Rather, it was a tradition where what we would think of as "realism" was a secondary consideration. Instead, the important thing was to show images of things in the most direct and orderly fashion, to have the most powerful influence over the events of the next life.

Egyptian Papyrus Art
The Golden Throne of King Tutankhamen

The ancient Greeks loved order in their art, but were more interested in the way it affected the thought and ethics of man's life than of his death. The orderly structure of their art emphasized unity and balance, and we still call art that emphasizes these qualities "classical." More than anything else, the Greeks loved the proportions of the human body, and their statues have been an inspiration through the ages for any artist seeking both idealism and realism in the human form.

Myron, Discobolos
Myron, Discobolos (The Discus Thrower) 470-440 BCE

In 480 BCE, the Persians invaded Greece and burnt down and sacked the temples on the Athenian hill called the Acropolis. But the Persian invasion was defeated, and under the leadership of the great Pericles, the Athenians began a rebuilding project that would become the stuff of legend. This time the temples were built with marble so as to stand the test of time. The architect Iktinos (mid 400s BCE) was to create a house for the statues of the gods that would be focus of Athenian worship. The result, the Parthenon, was a model of Classical form, order, and balance.

Iktinos
Iktinos: The Parthenon

Art from the Golden Age of Pericles, roughly 500-300 BCE, was generally serene, classical, and Apollonian. But as Greek art spread throughout the Mediterranean world to non-Greek people who were fascinated by Greek culture, the Dionysian cult seemed to have more appeal than the staid Apollonian. In this Hellenistic culture (second and first centuries BCE-Hellenes are what the Greeks called themselves), sculpture became more expressive, less reserved. The famous Laocoön is an example. Here portrayed is the Trojan priest who has just warned his countrymen not to accept the wooden horse that the Greeks have given them. The sea god Poseidon, who wants Troy destroyed, sends two giant serpents out of the sea to destroy the hapless priest and his two sons. This is one of the many examples of the gods' cruelty in Greek art, and it represents the suffering man must often endure at the whim of fate. Notice that the statue still displays a high degree of realism, but the emphasis is more on emotional expression than on form and balance.

polydoros
Polydoros of Rhodes, Laocoön and His Sons, 160 BCE

In the first century BCE, a new power, the Romans, conquered the Greek city-states and kingdoms. The Romans were deeply affected by Greek culture, or as the old adage puts it, "Rome conquered Greece, but Greece conquered Rome." But the Romans were a civic-minded empire, and much of their art and architecture was created to glorify Rome and serve the public good. Ceremonial works and triumphal arches celebrated military victories and served as a means of humiliating defeated opponents: as the newly enslaved prisoners marched under the arch, they symbolically came under the yoke of the empire.

Arch of Constantine
Arch of Constantine, Rome

Romans were fond of Greek works. In fact, many of the Greek statues we have today exist only as Roman copies. Thus much of what we see in Roman sculpture is not really Roman, nor is it particularly innovative. The notable exception is the Roman portrait bust. Roman artists excelled in creating these sculptural head-and-shoulders reproductions of famous people. Many are extremely lifelike.

Roman Republic
Roman Republic-era bust, Portrait of an Old Man

Romans also excelled at making mosaics, remnants of which are scattered throughout the empire from Britain to Jordan. A large collection of Roman fresco painting survives in Pompeii and Herculaneum, buried and preserved in volcanic ash after the eruption of the volcano Vesuvius in 79 CE.

Fresco from the House
House of Vettii in Pompeii, The Punishment of Ixion, 60-79 CE

Medieval Art (500-1400 CE) Before Rome fell around 500 CE, it split into two halves. The Western half was overcome by Germanic tribes and fragmented into kingdoms that would eventually become the modern nations of Western Europe (including England, France, Spain, and Italy). But the Eastern half, or Byzantine Empire, remained an important power throughout the Middle Ages. Byzantine artists produced the first important art of the Middle Ages. Like the ancient Egyptians, they were uninterested in a physical realism. Instead, they sought to portray a spiritual or symbolic reality-people are presented frontally, the facial expressions are rather stern looking, and eyes are often oversized. You will notice that the baby Jesus in the picture does not have the proportions of a baby, but instead is more like a little man, sitting on his mother's lap teaching. Jesus is holding his hand in a common theological symbol. The hand position of Jesus is a symbol for the Trinity and the dual nature of Jesus. The two fingers held apart indicate that Jesus was both fully human and fully divine. The thumb, pinky and ring finger are held together, symbolizing the three in one nature of the Trinity (always three separate personages, always one God). This hand gesture is very prominent throughout Byzantine and Medieval iconography. Note, too, that the halo of light around Jesus's head is always different than anyone else's.  His had three bars extending out from his head which contain the Greek letters for the biblical verse "I am that I am" (Exodus 3:14). Byzantine artists chose to portray Jesus this way to show that he was more than mere human, but the true God of the Old Testament.

byzantine
Madonna and Child

In the early Middle Ages, the Byzantine style dominated painting in the west as well as the east. As mentioned in Week 2, churches were built in the Romanesque style (in the style of Rome.) These churches were based on a series of Roman arches, which created long, barrel-shaped vaults. These vaults had to have rather low ceilings and small windows; otherwise, the vaults would collapse from their own weight. To make a large building, vaults were stacked one on top the other. 

romanesque
Abbey of St. Austremonde, Issoire, France

For the first five or six centuries after the Roman political structure collapsed, the economy of Europe became primarily agrarian, based on local farming communities and markets. The complex trading networks of the Roman world were almost entirely disrupted. Governments were unstable, and constant tribal warfare was the norm. Occasionally a great empire would arise, like Charlemagne's Empire (which consisted of the modern countries of France, Germany, Switzerland, Belgium, the Netherlands, and the northern part of Italy down to Rome) in the eighth century, only to fragment again and become dominated by regional lords. By the 1000s, Europe had begun to emerge from the political and economic turmoil caused by the fall of the Roman Empire.  New agricultural techniques, better weather (the Medieval Warm Period) and a more stable political environment fostered growth in both population and economy.  The crusades, although destructive initially, established new trade relations with the East.  In the place of agricultural villages, towns and cities burgeoned and trade flourished. These towns built great cathedrals, monuments to both their newfound prosperity and their ancient faith.

cathedral of notre dame
Cathedral of Notre Dame (Our Lady), Paris

In 1144 the Abbey Church of St. Denis, outside of Paris, was rededicated.  The basilica of St. Denis was a very old and prestigious church, housing the bodies of several French kings, but was at that time already almost 400 years old.  Abbot Suger headed up the reconstruction of the new building.  He and his architects created a radical new style, designed specifically to bring light into the main hall of the church.  As described in Week 2 - Elements of Architecture, Abbot Suger used ribbed vaulting, pointed arches, and flying buttresses to create a skeleton of stone to hold up the soaring ceilings of the church, thus allowing them to fill the once dark walls, with radiant stained glass.  When the king, and many other visiting bishops came to the rededication of the basilica, they walked into a new church which stunned them with its beauty.  

Saint-Denis stained glass cathedral.   

St. Denis, Paris - Choir and Stained Glass (Photo By Pierre Poschadel - wikicommons.org)

Abbot Suger had created the style that would latter come to be called "Gothic."  The rededication of St. Denis sparked a new wave of building across Europe as every town and bishop wanted to have their church emulate Suger's model.  This new way of building churches became the preferred style for the next three hundred years in western Europe.  Much of the remaining statues and arts of the Middle Ages are preserved in these magnificent buildings. 

Book Arts in the Middle Ages - Another important source of art in the Middle Ages was the adornment of books.   Making books (codices) at this time was very expensive and labor intensive.  Books were precious objects and were treated as such by their creators and owners.  Manuscripts (handwritten books) were often adorned with wonderfully complex, geometric designs and visual depictions of the scenes depicted in their pages.  The first letter or letters of a chapter would be historiated, or enlarged and decorated to fill a large part of the page, as in this beautiful example from the Linsisfarne Gospels manuscript.  This is the first page of the Book of Mathew.  The letters L, I, and B from the Latin word 'liber' meaning "book" have been greatly enlarged and heavily decorated by a master of the book arts.  This was done in handmade ink and paint, with handmade quills and brushes.  Mistakes could not be easily painted over, it was a one shot chance to get it right.  These book artists had to carefully plan, and have a very steady hand as they worked.

Lind is farne image.  

Beginning of the Book of Mathew, Lindisfarne Gospels

Very wealthy patrons could sometimes afford to commission an even richer method of decorating their manuscripts - illuminations.  Illumination, in a strict sense, refers to the use of gold leaf foil in the decoration of pages in a book.  A thin glue made of resin (tree sap) would be applied to the areas that were to be covered in gold, and then gold leafing would be pressed on to create these highlights within the artwork of medieval manuscripts. Below is a picture of a carpet page from the book of Kells, from Ireland.  A carpet page is an entire page dedicated to art, with no words on it.  Note the intricately incorporated lines of gold leafing within the design, overlapping and underlapping other lines to create a wonderful three-dimensional effect.

Carpet page book of Kells.  

Book of Kells, Carpet Page

In the late Middle Ages, the emotional, mystical mindset that had dominated western art for centuries began to give way to a new realism. Leading this revolution was the Florentine artist Giotto (1267-1337). He was the first to create figures that appear somewhat three-dimensional and included a more accurate use of proportion. His saints and angels looked like real people rather than the distorted works of his predecessors. In Lamentation, the faces of the angels and mourners surrounding the slain Savior show a real depth of feeling. Notice the new technique of foreshortening in the outstretched arm of the center figure. This new realism was an important step leading to the Renaissance.

giotto
Giotto, Lamentation over the Body of Christ, 1305-06

Sometime during the first quarter of the 15th century, in what we now call Belgium, the Van Eyck brothers, Jan and Hubert, began experimenting with new paint mixtures. By using linseed oil as a vehicle, they invented a medium that was superior in many ways to tempera, the most popular portrait medium of the day. Oil paint took longer to dry, and allowed color mixing on the painted surface, which in turn, led to more realistic uses of light effects.

This also meant that the surface being paint­ed could be more portable (canvas) rather than the thick, heavy wooden panels or the immobile plaster walls and ceilings employed by tempera and fresco painters. Soon this painting medium was in wide use throughout Europe. Artists were able to more accurately represent the world around them in a more naturalistic style. The flexibility of oil was in part responsible for new, more "human" techniques in painting.

