Style is the result of the many choices an artist makes regarding the medium, elements, and form of her art. Generally the time and place in which the artist lives influences these choices. Often an artist works for a patron and must satisfy his patron's tastes. The same is true of an artist who creates for a paying public. Even an artist who doesn't seek to earn a living with her art usually desires to be understood by their contemporaries and by posterity. Hence the language, fashions, and mores of society have influenced art throughout history.

Style Periods To help us understand how changing society has influenced art through the ages, we divide history into style periods. The historians of each art form view these style periods a little differently from each other. Music tends to lag behind some of the other arts-the Romantic era in literature, for example, was almost over by the time the Romantic era in music got rolling. Some art forms use different names for some of the style periods. The visual arts, for example, call the later 18th century the Neo-Classic era because artists of the day modeled their work after the classic paintings and sculptures of ancient Greece and Rome. On the other hand, there is almost no music remaining from Greek and Roman days, so musicians call the Neo-Classical era simply Classical. To make matters even more confusing, music historians use neo-classical to describe a musical movement of the 20th century.

To make things just a little easier for you, we will reduce all of the different movements to seven:

Movements
Ancient	to 500CE**
Medieval	500-1450
Renaissance	1450-1600
Baroque	1600-1750
Classical	1725-1825
Romantic	1800-1900
20th Century	1900-present
**CE, or Common Era, is an updated version of AD, or anno domini - "the year of our Lord."

You will notice that some of the dates overlap-this will help us account for the way some arts got started in a new style earlier than others, while some styles in some art forms lasted longer than others. As we go through this course, we will look at various styles period by period and show you how the different art forms relate to each other. We will begin with a brief overview of the visual arts before the Renaissance.

Plato Ancient art reached its pinnacle in Athens, Greece, in the sixth, fifth, and fourth centuries BC. Today, we call this period Classic, a word that means "exemplary, of top quality, outstanding." In the Classic period the great Greek tragedies, such as Sophocles' Oedipus Rex, represented Dionysian art. But the three great philosophers, Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle, spoke for the Apollonian way of life. Plato (c. 428-347 B.C.) was Socrates' student and Aristotle's teacher.

The School of Athens
Raphael, Plato from The School of Athens, 1509-10

Plato was also a follower of Pythagoras, a mathematician and philosopher who lived two centuries earlier. Most of us remember the Pythagorean theorem from our geometry days: "The sum of the squares of the two sides of a right angle equals the square of its hypotenuse." Pythagoras also discovered that the notes of the musical scale were a result of numerical ratios. This sort of thing excited Plato to no end, and led him to believe that the entire universe was created according to musical/mathematical proportions, and that the music that pleased most was that which most closely matched the perfect harmony of the universe. To Plato, music should appeal more to the head than to the heart. He was deeply suspicious of music that did not correspond to his intellectual numerical system, such as the music of the tragedies and comedies-the Dionysian music.

Plato taught that not only was Dionysian music bad aesthetically because it did not reflect the divine harmony of the cosmos, but that it was bad morally because it caused our own soul to be forced out of tune. In his Republic, which is a utopian vision of the ideal political state, Plato prescribed that young people should listen to music that inspires courage and thoughtfulness, but avoid tunes that are slothful or lustful. Tragedy was especially bad because it "waters the growth of passions which should be allowed to wither away and sets them up in control, although the goodness and happiness of our lives depend on their being held in subjection." He even went so far as to suggest that since such music was bad for the individual, it was bad for society as a whole and should be censored by the state.

Today, of course, we are still concerned with the moral dimension of art and worry that certain kinds of art, music, and entertainment have a degrading effect on our souls and on society at large. Nevertheless, Plato's idea that the government should censor music makes him seem a bit of a fascist crackpot, and seldom has anyone taken him up on it. But Plato had other philosophies that were much more influential. One of them was his Doctrine of Ideas.

The Doctrine Of Ideas If you have ever been involved in the creative process, you will have noticed that the actual work of creation ends up quite a bit different from your original intention. As I write this sentence I start with a general idea that may or may not be fully expressed in the finished product. Part of it is because the idea was not formed fully in the first place. Part of it is because I have a hard time finding the exact words to express the idea. Part of it is because I am slow enough of a typist that by the time I get to the end of a sentence I have forgotten what I set out to say…

The truth is, I find that my skill as a writer is not up to expressing my best ideas, even to my own satisfaction. It's the kind of thing Moroni was referring to when he spoke of the painstaking way in which he inscribed his writings on the Golden Plates: "And thou hast made us that we could write but little, because of the awkwardness of our hands…Thou hast also made our words powerful and great, even that we cannot write them; wherefore when we write, we behold our weakness, and stumble because of the placing of our words…" (Ether 12: 24-25)

You might have a similar experience with a lump of clay. First of all, imagine the head of someone you love. Picture it as clearly as you possibly can. Then imagine how you would render that head in the clay. Now take some clay and attempt to fashion it according to your ideas. You will probably find, unless you are a superbly competent sculptor, that the finished product is nothing like the idea. Michelangelo said he could envision his statues inside a chunk of marble, and all he had to do was chip away all the parts that didn't look like his idea. But for most of us, creation isn't that simple.

Likewise, all creation in this world is not quite perfect. Even things that seem perfect at first are transitory (like a perfect rose that withers and fades). Everything changes; everything decays. Nothing in mortality quite realizes our best dreams; nothing lives up to our best ideas. But the flip-side of this pessimistic outlook is that somewhere out there is perfection, and someday we will achieve it. And while the world may not be perfect, if we strive for that ideal, we will move resolutely toward it, and there will be improvement.

So let's take that word-ideal-and think about it for a moment. We use it to refer to the best possible version of something-we talk about the ideal situation, the ideal world, the ideal spouse. And we call someone who holds to ideals an idealist. Sometimes, though, we use the word idealist in a slightly negative way, as though someone who holds to ideals does not live in the real world. Our society prefers the pragmatist, someone who can get things done.

Notice that the root word of "ideal" is simply "idea." So ideal means something based on an idea. The ideal world is the world of somebody's idea. Whose idea? Well, it can be anybody's, really. Implicit in this concept is that one person's ideal world may be different from yours. It may be that in their ideal world there are no video games, no rap music, no emo haircuts. But those things may not necessarily be absent from your ideal world-you obviously have different ideas than they do. You might picture a world where everyone is young, and the sky is always blue, where ice cream helps you lose weight, everybody lives at Disneyland, and dreams really do come true. But is this reality? Of course not. In our day and age we call this fantasy. The real world is much more practical-it is what is there in spite of our ideas. No matter how much we dream, it stays the same. But what if we are talking about something else? What if the ideal world is the world of God's idea? Would that make it any more real?

This question of ideas and reality was one of Plato's major preoccupations. Most of Plato's philosophical works are cast as dialogues between Socrates, his old teacher, and Socrates' students. Plato was interested in the branch of philosophy called metaphysics, which is a study of the question: "What is real?" Plato had some strong ideas regarding ideas and reality, and they are strikingly different from those most people hold today. Plato believed that the tangible things of this world, the things we see, hear, taste, touch, and smell, are not where reality really lies. These "actual" things are but mere copies of the ideas that generated them and are hence less real than the ideas themselves.

For Plato, reality lay in the realm of ideas, where things were at once perfect and unchangeable. When we set out to make something-a chair, for example-we have an idea of what a chair is supposed to do. This is the chair's essence, and in this state, it is perfect. It is only when we set out to actually construct this chair that we encounter problems. Perhaps we can't get material to make it sturdy enough or comfortable enough. Perhaps we miscalculate on the varnish and dye, and it ends up with less appealing colors that we imagined. Perhaps we do a really good job and when we are done we sit back and admire it and think our work is perfect, but then some big lummox comes and sits in it with dirty shoes, and it gets all scuffed up and it is somehow never the same again. This sort of thing doesn't happen with the ideal chair-it is perfect and unchanging, and this, to Plato, made it real.

This, like all good philosophy, has some direct application to life. If I am a craftsman, I am constantly striving toward the ideal. The fact that I have a perfect, immutable chair in my mind gives me a standard to strive toward. Without this ideal, any old chair will do, and there is no means for measuring improvement. This becomes especially helpful when we realize that our actual selves are but imperfect copies of ideal beings. The ideal me is energetic, humble, full of charity, faithful, obedient, trustworthy, loyal, helpful, friendly, courteous, kind, obedient, cheerful, thrifty, brave, clean, and reverent. The actual me is something less than ideal, but the ideal gives me something to strive toward. And it is somehow comforting to know that God, who sees the end from the beginning, sees the statue in my marble and looks on me not just as who I am, but who he knows I will become. So perhaps Plato is right-what you see isn't the real me. The real me is the me that exists in the mind of God, the me that I will become when all of God's purposes are fulfilled.

Admittedly, when we are stuck in this world of flesh and time, it is hard to see any other reality than what we can actually perceive with our senses. Philosophers call this empiricism, the belief that our senses are our only avenue to knowledge. We gather empirical datawith our physical senses and organize it in our minds. Empiricists believe that this is the only reality we can ever know. But Plato insists that empiricism was merely a bad habit, that the right discipline of the mind could lead a person to perceive a higher reality.

The Allegory Of The Cave In his famous "Allegory of the Cave," Plato describes the state of empirical man and his need to see beyond the mere shadows of mortal existence:

Socrates: And now, let me show in a parable how far our nature is enlightened or unenlightened:-Behold! human beings living in an underground cave; here they have been from their childhood, and have their legs and necks chained so that they cannot move, and can only see before them, being prevented by the chains from turning round their heads. Above and behind them a fire is blazing at a distance, and between the fire and the prisoners there is a raised way; and you will see, if you look, a low wall built along the way, like the screen which marionette players have in front of them, over which they show the puppets.

Glaucon: I see.

Socrates: And do you see men passing along the wall carrying all sorts of vessels, and statues and figures of animals made of wood and stone and various materials, which appear over the wall?

Glaucon: You have shown me a strange image, and they are strange prisoners.

The shadows of a cat, a chair, a table, and prisoners being cast on a wall from a fire, by puppeteers. 
Plato, Allegory of the Cave

Socrates: Like ourselves; and they see only their own shadows, or the shadows of one another, which the fire throws on the opposite wall of the cave?

Glaucon: True, he said; how could they see anything but the shadows if they were never allowed to move their heads?

Socrates: And of the objects which are being carried in like manner they would only see the shadows?

Glaucon: Yes.

Socrates: To them the truth would be literally nothing but the shadows of the images.

Glaucon: That is certain.

family gathered

Socrates: And now look again, and see what will naturally follow if the prisoners are released and disabused of their error. At first, when any of them is liberated and compelled suddenly to stand up and turn his neck round and walk and look towards the light, he will suffer sharp pains; the glare will distress him, and he will be unable to see the realities of which in his former state he had seen the shadows-will he not be perplexed? Will he not fancy that the shadows which he formerly saw are truer than the objects which are now shown to him?

Glaucon: Far truer.

Socrates: And if he is compelled to look straight at the light, will he not have a pain in his eyes which will make him turn away to take in the objects of vision which he can see, and which he will conceive to be in reality clearer than the things which are now being shown to him?

Glaucon: True.

Socrates: And suppose once more, that he is reluctantly dragged up a steep and rugged ascent, and held fast until he's forced into the presence of the sun himself, is he not likely to be pained and irritated? When he approaches the light his eyes will be dazzled, and he will not be able to see anything at all of what are now called realities.

Glaucon: Not all in a moment.

Socrates: He will require to grow accustomed to the sight of the upper world. And first he will see the shadows best, next the reflections of men and other objects in the water, and then the objects themselves; then he will gaze upon the light of the moon and the stars and the spangled heaven; and he will see the sky and the stars by night better than the sun or the light of the sun by day?

Glaucon: Certainly.

the wanderer

Socrates: Last of all he will be able to see the sun, and not mere reflections of it in the water, but he will see it in his own proper place, and he will contemplate it as he is.

Glaucon: Certainly.

Socrates: And when he remembered his old habitation, and the wisdom of the cave and his fellow-prisoners, do you not suppose that he would felicitate himself on the change, and pity them?

Glaucon: Certainly, he would.

Socrates: This entire allegory you may now append, dear Glaucon: the prison-house is the world of sight, the light of the fire is the sun, and the journey upwards is the ascent of the soul into the intellectual world. But my opinion is that in the world of knowledge the idea of good appears last of all, and is seen only with an effort; and, when seen, is also inferred to be the universal author of all things beautiful and right, parent of light in this visible world, and the immediate source of reason and truth in the intellectual; and that this is the power upon which he who would act rationally must have his eye fixed.

Thus, to Plato, the things of the actual world, the things readily perceived by our senses, are but shadows of a higher reality. It is the constant exercise of the disciplined, intellectual mind to turn away from shadows and into the light in order to perceive their true source. The highest reality of all is The One, or God, the source of all truth. The philosopher's aim is to sort through all the shadows as soon as possible and focus on what is truly there.
