Michelangelo Buonarotti was born about a generation after Gutenberg invented a printing press with moveable type. He was twenty-eight when Columbus discovered America, and fifty-three when Martin Luther nailed his 95 theses on the door of Wittenberg Chapel. He was a native son of Florence, a city in the Tuscan region of central Italy. In Michelangelo's day Florence was a proud, independent republic, a city-state that had produced some of the greatest artists in history, including the poets Dante and Petrarch, the painters Giotto and Masaccio, the architect Brunelleschi, and the sculptor Donatello. When Michelangelo was a young man, Prince Lorenzo de Medici brought him to live in his court and study sculpting. There Michelangelo encountered the philosopher, Marsilio Ficino, a self-proclaimed neo-Platonist.

Raphael
Raphael, portrait of Michelangelo, detail from The School of Athens, 1509

Ficino believed that the life of the universe, including human life, was linked to God by a process of continuous illumination. All earthly forms originated as ideas in the mind of God, which emanated and shaped their earthly counterparts. Ficino believed that truth, goodness, and beauty were all different ways of looking at the same thing, which was the nature and character of God. This Light of God not only emanated into the forms of the natural world, but also into the mind of man. Thus man was capable of participating in the divine act of creation by realizing the ideal in his art. Some artists are possessed of this creative ability in an uncommon way—in modern times we call this genius.

Michelangelo is one of the great artists, in company with Shakespeare, Mozart, and a few others, to embody the concept of genius as the possessor of a kind of superhuman set of gifts that sets him apart from the rest of the human family. Part of this was his skill as a sculptor. He had an exceptionally strong sense of spatial awareness and was able to envision a three-dimensional form with extraordinary accuracy and hold it in his mind for a long period of time. His skill in executing his design was without peer, and he possessed a manual dexterity that enabled him to shape the stone according to his conception with unparalleled skill. He was famous for saying that he was able to see the figure in a slab of marble, and for him, the process of carving was merely clearing away all of the stone that was extraneous to his conception.

But the way Michelangelo saw it, these skills were but mere servants to his real gift, which was his ability to see things that no other human saw. Artists in Michelangelo's day were thought of as little better than glorified craftsmen. Their aim was to make a representation the way convention dictated. A good artist did it better than others, but there was not much room for individuality. Michelangelo embraced (or even created) the concept of genius to counter this idea. He was unique, with a unique vision. He was an intellectual, a possessor of special skills and forms of knowledge so arcane that they were often referred to as secrets. In his Biblical sculptures and paintings, he considered himself every bit as qualified to interpret scripture as any theologian. His job was to unlock the secrets of the Bible and to reveal its messages to mankind. This more than anything else accounts for the striking originality of the Sistine Chapel ceiling. He painted the prophets of the Old Testament with such sympathy because he considered himself one of their number. Like them, he was called to spread the word of God.

As we mentioned earlier, a defining characteristic of the Renaissance was the interest in the art and culture of ancient Greece and Rome. This permeated all art forms of the day—literature stressed Greek and Roman mythology, the visual arts sought to imitate the architecture, statuary, and murals of ancient times, and even music sought to discover the relationship between words and music that existed in Greek theatre. It may seem strange that a devout Christian like Michelangelo would be interested in the myths and mythologically-inspired characters of pagan Greece. But neo-Platonism believed that the light of God spoke through pagans in the time before Christ and inspired and informed their work. Thus the stories of Zeus and Apollo, of Hercules and Orpheus, were predecessors of Christian theology as surely as were the words of the Hebrew prophets.

It should be noted that most artists of Michelangelo's day, including Michelangelo himself, were deeply religious. But while in the Middle Ages a person's humanity was seen as an impediment to his righteousness, in the Renaissance it was considered to be a mirror of the nature of God. This is another example of humanism, the study and celebration of human interests, desires, and characteristics. The ancient Greeks were the ultimate humanists, and their sculptures reveled in the beauty of the human form. This may have been the most powerful influence of all on Michelangelo's art. To Michelangelo the human body had been literally created in the image of God—it was not an object of shame but something to be studied and celebrated. As a young man, he made a detailed study of human anatomy, including the dissection of cadavers. He made it his life's work to explore in stunning detail all the expressive possibilities of the human body.

As one of the great artists of the age, and as a devout Catholic, it was natural that Michelangelo would attract the attention of the pope in Rome, Julius II, who fought to win the independence of the Papal States and transform the physical fabric of Rome. Julius' predecessor and uncle, Sixtus IV, remodeled the Vatican Library and rebuilt the Palatine Chapel, now called Sistine Chapel (after Sixtus). Julius remodeled the papal apartments in the Vatican palace (commissioning Raphael to create his greatest murals, including the School of Athens), built the Vatican museum, and laid the foundation stone for St. Peter's basilica. The cost of all this led to the sale of indulgences and the Protestant Reformation. But Julius desired to make Rome a new Jerusalem as the end of the world approached.

Julius first hired Michelangelo to build a tomb for him, and Michelangelo designed an immense architectural work, filled with hundreds of statues. It was so grand that the plans embarrassed even Pope Julius, so he abandoned the idea and then pressured Michelangelo into painting the Sistine Chapel ceiling. At first Michelangelo resisted. He was upset over the cancellation of his grand project for Julius' tomb. Besides, he was a sculptor, not a painter. It was not something that promised to inspire his best work.

Nevertheless, once Michelangelo agreed to work on it, he threw himself into the task with unrivaled vigor. The plan for the ceiling was much more intricate and detailed than Julius had conceived. Michelangelo executed it as a fresco, painted on wet plaster by standing on a platform and bending over backwards. Throughout the process, and for a long time afterwards, Michelangelo complained of cramps, spasms, and headaches. One of his biographers, Giorgio Vasari, wrote: "The work was executed with great discomfort to himself, from his having to labor with his face upwards, which so impaired his sight that for a time, which was not less than several months, he was not able to read letters or look at drawings save with his head backwards."

The Sistine Chapel Ceiling The Sistine Chapel is the private chapel of the pope, and it is where the cardinals meet in conclave to elect a new pope. The dimensions of the chapel are exactly those of Solomon's temple. Sixtus had employed artists to paint the life of Christ and of Moses. Michelangelo was to paint the period of time before Moses, the age before the Law. It would especially feature the Creation, the Fall, and the Flood. Michelangelo also chose to portray the prophets and sibyls (pagan prophetesses) that prophesied of the coming of Christ; four other Old Testament scenes (David and Goliath, Judith and Holophernes, the Hanging of Haman, and the Brazen Serpent); a series of paintings representing the ancestors of Christ; and numerous other figures. He also painted an architectural framework around these scenes, a classical temple that resembles the design for Julius' abandoned tomb.

It is important to remember that all of the architectural elements on the ceiling are Michelangelo's paintings. There are pillars held up by putti, or child-like angels. There are bronze figures like classical statues, captured in the nooks and crannies of the painted architecture, separated from each other by rams' skulls. And the central panels are surrounded by nude figures, or ignudi, sitting on the pedestals and expressing the full range of human emotion. What are we to make of all of these added details? Perhaps Michelangelo intends them to represent the teeming hordes of humanity that lived before the coming of Christ. Perhaps they represent the range of human passions that Christ came to understand and redeem as part of his atonement. Or perhaps Michelangelo put them there simply as decoration, for their sheer beauty, grace, and elegance. For in the midst of Michelangelo's teachings about the Bible, the Fall, and the Atonement, is the message that mankind has the spark of divinity, that this wretched and stubborn creature is nonetheless God's finest creation and certainly worth redeeming.

Bronze, Sistine Chapel
Sistine Chapel Ceiling, Bronze figures, ram skull, and putti, 1508-12

The central panels of the Sistine Chapel ceiling are in three groups of three paintings each, called triads. The first triad deals with the creation, and includes the Separation of Light from Darkness, the Creation of the Sun, Moon, and Plants,and the Creation of Life in the Waters. Since Michelangelo painted these panels in reverse order, from last to first (he wanted to be at his best when painting the scenes with God in them), the painting of the Separation of Light from Darkness was the last panel Michelangelo painted on the Sistine ceiling. By this point Michelangelo was so adept at ceiling fresco that he painted it freehand (without drawing it on paper first and then adding it to the ceiling with charcoal) and painted it in just one working day of about eight hours. It is a masterpiece of foreshortening, and shows God as if we are on the ground looking up at Him as he stretches upward to reach the clouds. Michelangelo paints God as a human being, no wings or halos, but with superhuman power and presence. He does not paint him as nude, but his sinews and muscles are clearly visible through the folds of his clothing.

Light from Darkness, Sistine Chapel
Sistine Chapel Ceiling, The Separation of Light from Darkness with ignudi, 1508-12

In the second panel, we see God both coming and going, on the right as he stretches out his arms to simultaneously bring the sun and moon into existence, and on the left as he turns to bring forth plant life. Again, note his powerfully muscled arms, legs, and chest. He is surrounded and upheld by putti, child angels that Michelangelo uses to symbolize his powers and authority. This may remind LDS members of the pre-existent spirits who participated in the creation and of the hosts of heaven who uphold God in their obedience to His perfect law. Michelangelo also shows God's power and authority in His face as he commands the elements to form the sun and the moon. As He does so, the putti start back, filled with awe and reverence.

The Creation, Sistine Chapel
Sistine Chapel Ceiling, The Creation of the Sun, Moon, and Plants, 1508-12

The second triad has to do with the creation and fall of Adam and Eve. The first panel is the most famous painting on the ceiling, and shows God giving life to the newly-created Adam. This painting was so revolutionary that at least one of Michelangelo's early biographers had no idea what he looking at: "Among the most important figures," he recorded, "is that of an old man, in the middle of the ceiling, who is represented in the act of flying through the air." Not only is God devoid of any haloes or other identifying symbology, there is no indication that Adam has been formed out of the dust of the earth. Rather, the emphasis is on God imbuing life to his new creation as he stretches to touch his finger. The painting captures the moment just as the spirit enters Adam and he becomes a living soul.

The Creation of Adam, Sistine Chapel
Sistine Chapel Ceiling, The Creation of Adam, 1508-12

God seems to be more intent on His own finger than on Adam's, and the intensity of His gaze not only imparts life to Adam, but a measure of His own godliness. Adam in his turn looks past God at the pre-existent Eve whom God cradles in his left arm, prepared spiritually as an help meet for the newly created Adam. As Adam awakens, he not only achieves consciousness, but also a comprehension of God's will and law. In no other painting in the Sistine Chapel does Michelangelo create a human form of such beauty as that of the newly created Adam. This is God's best work, still uncorrupted by sin and mortality. Adam is in a perfect state of harmony with his God.

The second painting in the central triad is that of the Creation of Eve. The third, the Fall, frames in a single image two distinct events-Adam and Eve partaking of the forbidden fruit, and the guilty pair being cast out of the Garden of Eden. Traditionally these two events were represented separately, but here Michelangelo frames them both with terrifying symmetry. At the center is the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil. Satan, half serpent, half man, writhes around it, extending to the left and offering the fruit to Eve who takes it casually. Adam, meanwhile, does not wait for Eve to partake, but eagerly climbs up the trunk to help himself, emphasizing that his disobedience is no one's fault but his own. Extending from the tree to the right is the cherubim with flaming sword that drives Adam and Eve from the garden. The couple, meanwhile, is fallen and guilty, their former grace and beauty gone, their faces stricken with anguish. Once again our eyes return to the tree. Its branch to the left, along with the angel's arm and sword to the right, form a cross, reminding us of the cost of mankind's transgressions.

The Fall of Adam and Eve, Sistine Chapel
Sistine Chapel Ceiling, The Fall of Adam and Eve, 1508-12

The Gothic-style intersecting arches of the supporting pillars in the Chapel create triangular spaces on the ceiling calledspandrels. Michelangelo painted the four corner spandrels to feature four more Old Testament stories. Each of the later spandrels is a phantasmagoria filled with writhing, struggling figures, and full of eruptive force that goes beyond the stories from which they are drawn. The first of these is David and Goliath. This time Michelangelo shows David just at the moment before he swings his sword to behead the fallen giant.

David and Goliath, Sistine Chapel
Sistine Chapel Ceiling, David and Goliath, 1508-12

Here Michelangelo sacrifices precise drawing and his habitual interest in the human form for the drama of the moment. This painting is all about action and emotion. The same is true of the three other spandrel paintings. Judith and Holofernes is taken from the Apocrypha and shows Judith and her servant taking the Assyrian general's head on a platter away from his beheaded corpse. The Hanging of Haman shows the villain of the book of Esther hanging on a cross, not a gallows, again foreshadowing the death of Christ. The Brazen Serpent again divides good from evil. On the left, the faithful are healed by looking at the image of the serpent hoisted on high, while the wicked writhe in agony, tormented by the all-too-real fiery, flying serpents. Once again, Michelangelo shows a type of Christ, and divides people according to their willingness to follow the Savior and their resultant happiness or misery.

Brazen Serpent, Sistine Chapel
Sistine Chapel Ceiling, The Brazen Serpent, 1508-12

The remaining eight spandrels and fourteen other spaces called lunettes occupy the lowest level of the ceiling. They are filled with paintings that represent the ancestors of Christ. Michelangelo lists in these spaces the names in Christ's genealogy presented in the first chapter of the Book of Matthew. But the pictures do not correspond to the names—there are forty names listed in the lunettes and spandrels, all men, but over ninety figures, including numerous women and children. Rather than depicting the individual ancestors, Michelangelo has painted a representation of the peoples of Israel that lived before the coming of Christ. The most remarkable thing about these people is that they seem to be doing nothing. Rather they sit, bored and melancholy, like a group of travelers stranded in an airport or waiting for a bus. In one, a pretty lady seems to be flirting with a crotchety old man. In another, a father seems to lose patience with his wife over their troublesome children. In a third, a woman looks into a mirror while a young dandy looks past a book on a stand. Michelangelo's apparent message is that without Christ, life is empty and that those who lived before his coming had little to do besides wait.

Jacob and Joseph, Sistine Chapel
Josias, Sistine Chapel
Naason, Sistine Chapel
Sistine Chapel Ceiling, some of the Ancestors of Christ, 1508-12

Surrounding the center panels are gigantic portraits of seven Old Testament prophets who prophesied of Christ, as well as the five sibyls, female seers of ancient times, who, according to Roman Catholic tradition, had also seen and prophesied of Christ. Each of these prophets and sibyls are portrayed with a book, and each interact with one or more putti, who represent their geniuses. These are personifications of the Spirit-the source of the prophet's inspiration. In each painting Michelangelo gives us a vision of prophecy. The prophet Zechariah, for example, is filled with the Spirit as he reads his book. He is engrossed in its pages as its words enlighten his mind and quicken his understanding, while his putti read over his shoulder.

Zechariah, Sistine Chapel
Sistine Chapel Ceiling, Zechariah, 1508-12

The Delphic Sybyl, on the other hand, looks up from her reading and is caught wide-eyed in the moment when her vision begins. Her genius, however, continues to read.

Delphic Sibyl, Sistine Chapel
Sistine Chapel Ceiling, the Delphic Sibyl, 1508-12

Isaiah has been interrupted by his geniuses, who show to him the marvelous vision of the Virgin conceiving and bearing a Son, whose name shall be Emmanuel, or "God with us."

Isaiah, Sistine Chapel
Sistine Chapel Ceiling, Isaiah, 1508-12

Ezekiel, too, has been interrupted in his reading and looks with surprise and astonishment at his vision of wheels within wheels "way up in the middle of the air!"

Ezekiel, Sistine Chapel
Sistine Chapel Ceiling, Ezekiel, 1508-12

According to legend, the Cumaean Sibyl was once a young and beautiful maiden who was wooed by Apollo. The god promised her as many years of life as grains of sand as she could hold in her fist, but when she refused him, he doomed her to live out the same long life as a wizened old hag. Here she clutches her book with sinewy arms and powerful hands, a look of intense concentration and awe on her leathery face.

Cumaean Sibyl, Sistine Chapel
Sistine Chapel Ceiling, the Cumaean Sibyl, 1508-12

Daniel both reads and writes, one of his geniuses upholding his book while the other whispers in his ear. The fire of the Spirit is upon him (represented by his flaming red hair) as he reads in the book about the visions of Christ given to the prophets who went before him, and through the inspiration of the Holy Ghost writes his own prophesies about the Ancient of Days and the End of Time.

Daniel, Sistine Chapel
Sistine Chapel Ceiling, Daniel, 1508-12

The fire is more literal with the Erithraean Sibyl, who turns the pages in her book as her genius blows the flame of the Spirit into her mind.

Erithraean Sibyl, Sistine Chapel
Sistine Chapel Ceiling, the Erithraean Sibyl, 1508-12

The last prophet, whose image is hung on the far wall directly above what Michelangelo many years later would paint as the Last Judgment, is Jonah. In addition to putti, Jonah has a fish, reminding us that sometimes we need more than the quiet whisperings of the Spirit to persuade us to obedience.
