Thought and Diction
THOUGHT Some plays and films are meant purely as entertainment, and are not meant to carry any meaning beyond the pleasure of the viewer. But even the lightest works usually have a point to make. Independence Day, for instance, conveys the message that when humanity pulls together, it can overcome anything. Despicable Me teaches that family brings more happiness than a worldly achievement. Amidst the furious action of The Hobbit: An Unexpected Journey, Gandalf the Grey pauses to deliver this wise observation:

Film Title: The Hobbit: An Unexpected Journey Description: Gandalf the Grey reflects on why Bilbo Baggins was the right person to carry the ring. Director: Peter Jackson


(00:58 mins, "Why the Halfling?" TranscriptLinks to an external site.)

But the greatest films and plays are full of thought, and inspire in us thoughts that grow more profound the more intimate we become with the work. As with all great art, they demand our best. Sometimes the thoughts are conveyed directly from the lips of one of the characters. But often, as the proverb says, actions speak more loudly than words, and we can learn more from what the characters do than from what they say. Sometimes the learning comes more from the feelings we have about a character than any specific ideas they convey. In a romance, for instance, we feel frustrated by the complications that the lovers encounter and rewarded when they finally get together. Stories like these teach us about love, not by sharing specific maxims, but by allowing us to feel as the characters feel and experience what they experience.

Feeling this kind of empathy for the characters in a drama allows us to experience things that we would not be able to (or perhaps want to) experience in our own lives. Near the end of Shakespeare's Macbeth we encounter one of the great monologues of the show. After being goaded by his wife into a life of insatiable ambition and bloody crime, Macbeth's enemies are surrounding him-he is nearing defeat. Suddenly he hears a cry, and is informed that his wife, the queen, is dead. Macbeth's first response is that "She should have died hereafter. There would have been time for such a word." Death is always inconvenient, and in such a time as this, there is no time for mourning. But his apparent heartless remark leads Macbeth to ponder the brevity of life.

Film Title: Macbeth Description: Ian McKellan as Macbeth ponders the brevity of life. Director: Phillip Casson


(00:39 mins, "Tomorrow, and Tomorrow, and Tomorrow" TranscriptLinks to an external site.)

To-morrow, and to-morrow, and to-morrow, Creeps in this petty pace from day to day To the last syllable of recorded time, And all our yesterdays have lighted fools The way to dusty death.

Macbeth has always looked to the next conquest, to tomorrow, but in so doing, he discovers he has only accumulated a pile of empty yesterdays that bring no satisfaction or meaning beyond a relentless trail to the grave. He then uses a series of increasingly powerful metaphors to illustrate the illusory nature and ultimate emptiness of life.

Out, out, brief candle! Life's but a walking shadow, a poor player That struts and frets his hour upon the stage And then is heard no more: it is a tale Told by an idiot, full of sound and fury, Signifying nothing.

Each of the images that Macbeth presents-the snuffed out candle; the shadow mistaken for reality; the play actor (all too familiar to Shakespeare) strutting and fretting about his lines that will soon disappear into the ether; and most devastatingly of all, the idiot wandering up and down the streets having passionate conversations with no one-each of these present a compelling argument for the meaninglessness of life. But it is important to realize that Shakespeare did not necessarily want us to embrace this philosophy. We must keep the character and the playwright separate. Macbeth's was a life of brutal crime, and we should not be surprised that his soul is filled with bitterness and regret at the end. Alma described the process of Macbeth's life quite eloquently in Alma 12:10-11:

And therefore, he that will harden his heart, the same receiveth the lesser portion of the word; and he that will not harden his heart, to him is given the greater portion of the word, until it is given unto him to know the mysteries of God until he know them in full.

And they that will harden their hearts, to them is given the lesser portion of the word until they know nothing concerning his mysteries; and then they are taken captive by the devil, and led by his will down to destruction. Now this is what is meant by the chains of hell.

Macbeth has certainly found himself wrapped in the chains of hell. But the power of Macbeth doesn't come from the preaching of doctrine. Rather it comes from allowing us to enter inside Macbeth's head and heart, think what he thinks, feel what he feels, but at the same time be free enough to draw our own conclusions. Because of this, we not only receive the warning to harness ambition, but we can empathize with Macbeth's feelings of desolation. This sorrow we feel for the sins of another and their consequences is related, at least in a small way, to the Savior's Atoning sacrifice:

And he shall go forth, suffering the pains and afflictions and temptations of every kind; and this that the word might be fulfilled which saith he will take upon him the pains and the sicknesses of his people. And he will take upon him death, that he may loose the bands of death which bind his people; and he will take upon him their infirmities, that his bowels may be filled with mercy, according to the flesh, that he may know according to the flesh how to succor his people according to their infirmities (Alma 7:11).

Theatre, cinema, and all of the arts teach us what it is to be human. Of course, it is essential for us to come to know God: "And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent" (John 17:3). But it is also important to know our fellow humans in all walks of life, to empathize with them, to feel fear and pity on their behalf, regardless of the dire consequences of their actions or how deserving they are of their fate. For this reason religion and the humanities go hand in hand. Christ simultaneously offers mercy and compassion to the fallen and extends a firm but loving invitation to be better.

We have to be careful not to judge great works of art too hastily. Some people avoid Macbeth because of its brutal and violent nature. In doing so, they miss the opportunity of experiencing, in a direct and powerful way, the lessons the play teaches. A reading or performance of Macbeth goes beyond the simple preaching of doctrine because the reader or audience is connected at a deep emotional level to the consequences of insatiable ambition and unbridled violence.

DICTION All literature is about storytelling. Literature meant primarily to be read, such as a story, novel, or poem, usually features long descriptions by a narrator, and often the conversations of the characters make up a rather small part of the work. Plays and movies on the other hand consist almost entirely of conversation. But the thing that books, poems, plays, and films have in common is the importance of language.

Literature seeks to do two things: state something significant and interesting, and do it in a remarkable way. In fact, we might even say that literature not only contains great ideas, but it conveys those ideas with techniques designed to foster even more ideas. The best literature, like the best music and art, requires a good deal of contemplation, and often requires repeated readings. I like to compare two reading experiences I've had. Dan Brown's Da Vinci Code is a real "page turner"- the book happens in "real time," with one hair-raising event following another, and no bothersome character development to slow down the action. It did exactly the same thing to me as it did everyone else-I couldn't put it down, but I can't remember much about it. I have no desire to read it again. Compare this with Leo Tolstoy's War and Peace. It is an epic Russian novel, a thousand pages with dozens of characters with long Russian names like Prince Anatol Vasilievich Bolkhonsky and Count Nicolai Il'yich Rostov. It covers two decades of Russian history and is filled with long descriptive passages. I tried to read it a half dozen times before I ever made it through it, and even then it took me months to finish it. And yet it constantly is before me. I think of the characters as close friends and relatives; I compare people I know to characters in the book; I can quote long passages from it; and its philosophy is woven into the fabric of my life. Every three or four years I get an itch to read it again, and the itch isn't satisfied until I wend my way through it one more time. And each time is better than the last.

Like the other arts we have studied, literature comes in various media. Just as a painter might use fresco, oil, or watercolors, a writer might use poetry, prose, a sonnet, or a novel to create a textual presentation. This presentational form allows the writer to meet their expectations and say something substantive that, to use Aristotle's ideals, both instructs and delights.

Prose is a term that refers to writing that does not have a regular rhythmic pattern. Notice the pattern in the poem below:

Those little flakes that flutter down, They seem to know their place. They cover dingy surfaces And trim the trees with lace.

Then compare it with this prose paraphrase:

Snowflakes fall as if they know where to land, and they cover things that are shabby and make the trees look pretty.

The difference is obvious and marked by the poem's rhyme and rhythm. Poems also use imagery whereas prose generally tries to mean exactly what it says. For many years, prose was considered to be a lesser form of expression-more utilitarian than poetry, and less like the language of God. Of course the boundaries are not always clear, and some prose is highly poetic, while some poetry can be quite prosaic.

Prose is found in a number of sub-genres, including the novel, the novella, and the short story. Biographies, autobiographies, histories, and every other type of narrative can appear as prose, but can also appear as poetry. The novel, novella, and short story, however, are always in prose form.

Whereas prose is relatively undecorated and forthright, poetry allows for much greater latitude of expression. Poetry is image-laden and often figurative. It generally falls into a number of sub-categories including lyric, dramatic, and narrative.Lyric poetry consists of the thoughts and emotions of a single author and is usually short. This is the most common type of poetry today. Dramatic poetry introduces conflict into a situation or into the life of a character or narrator and, again, length is variable. Narrative poetry tells (narrates) a story, and can be any length. There are a vast variety of types of poetry, which are largely determined by form, tone, and subject matter.

Very simply put, a lyric poem is a short poem that represents the thoughts and feelings of a single narrator on some topic. The lyric poem is by far the most common genre of poetry. Here is a lyric poem by the 20th century American poet, Robert Frost:

Robert Frost
Never Again Would Birdsong Be the Same 

He would declare and could himself believe

That the birds there in all the garden round

From having heard the daylong voice of Eve

Had added to their own an oversound,

Her tone of meaning but without the words.

Admittedly an eloquence so soft

Could only have had an influence on birds

When call or laughter carried it aloft.

Be that as may be, she was in their song.

Moreover her voice upon their voices crossed

Had now persisted in the woods so long

That probably it never would be lost.

Never again would birds' song be the same.

And to do that to birds was why she came.

RobertFrost

Robert Frost (1874-1963)

This poem is relatively short and represents the thoughts or feelings of a single narrator. It is a tribute in sonnet form to Eve (and thereby women in general) that strives to demonstrate the pervasiveness of Eve's influence in the Garden.

Like lyric poetry, the dramatic monologue presents the speech of a narrator or character from a drama. Some lyric poems, like Macbeth's "To-morrow and to-morrow and to-morrow" speech, are from a play. Others are stand-alone poems that imply a dramatic situation. The most fascinating aspect of a dramatic monologue is what the narrator reveals (frequently unintentionally) about himself.

Epic poetry has long been considered the most elevated style of poetry and is, therefore, the most botched. Many writers who seek to make their mark on the poetic world by using epic poetry, have failed miserably. However, there are many successful and beautiful epics in existence that have become the powers of western epic-The Odyssey, The Iliad, Beowulf, The Aeneid, The Divine Comedy, and Paradise Lost. Epic is primarily an ancient genre largely because it provides a sufficient forum for the complex and thorough expression of creation or foundation myths of a given society. Epic is sweeping and long and displays a scope that is far broader than any other genre of poetry. Because of this, a foundation myth can find its complete expression only in an epic poem. One can only imagine how little the world would know of Greek civilization if the Iliad were a lyric poem.

While a good artist consciously or unconsciously uses genre, medium, and form to create his poems, he is not bound by them. In other words, even though we recognize these categories and demarcations, most artists tend to disregard them or push at their boundaries as they create. This means that any of the terms discussed in this section can apply universally to prose, verse, novel, short story, drama, or anything with plot, character, and conflict.

Like a painter's elements are the lines and colors on his canvas, a writer's elements consist of figurative language, rhyme,and rhythm. These are the tools the writer uses to provide the reader with the images and understanding necessary to comprehend a piece of literature; they are tools that can be applied throughout all the literary genres.

Figurative language is language that means something beyond its denotation (dictionary definition), and is heavy with connotation (implication and undertone). Thus, heaven is the place where God lives and where we hope to go after we die; this is the denotation of the word "heaven." But heaven has figurative connotation as well. If after eating some of Mom's cooking we say we are in heaven, we probably don't mean that we have passed through the veil and are in the presence of God. We are not being literal; we are being figurative, and we are using the word heaven for its connotation instead of its denotation. (A common grammatical error is the misuse of the word "literally," as in "I am literally in heaven." We mean, of course, that we are figuratively in heaven.)

Figurative language can occur in many forms, the most important of which are metaphor, simile, symbol, synecdoche, metonymy, analogy, and allegory. All of these are used to compare two unlike things and create an illuminating connection based on their relationship.

A metaphor is the simplest type of comparison. It is done by simply connecting and comparing two things with a form of the verb "to be":

That boy is a three-toed sloth.

Is the boy actually a three-toed sloth? Of course not, but his behavior toward work is similar to that of this lazy, moss-covered animal. Thus, the metaphor illuminates the behavior of the boy.

A simile uses the words "like" or "as," but otherwise works quite like a metaphor. For example:

That boy is like a three-toed sloth.

A symbol is a well-known object or idea used to represent a number of qualities. Latter-day Saints should relate well to symbols since we make such use of them in our theology. Baptism, for instance, represents cleansing and rebirth. The bread and water in the sacrament symbolizes the body and blood of our Savior. We derive meaning from symbolism because we are familiar with what the symbol represents. Thus, when making a symbol, we must use a representative item that our entire culture is aware of. For example, in medieval times, the rooster was a symbol of Christianity. This began with the cock crowing before Peter denied the Christ, but quickly became a symbol for repentance and for vigilance in looking out for sin. Roosters were put atop churches to remind Christians to be watchful against temptation. Today we no longer see the rooster as particularly vigilant, and so the symbol is mostly lost on us, even thought roosters are still used as weathervanes.

Writers use symbolism in a variety of ways. They can use it overtly, as does the Alliterative Master of the North in Sir Gawain and the Green Knight when he puts a picture of Mary on Gawain's shield. She now symbolizes his devotion, purity, chastity, and uprightness. The other side of his shield has a five-pointed star, or pentacle, which symbolizes a whole group of things: his five senses, his five fingers, the five virtues, the five joys of Mary, and so on. Easier modern symbols are the white hat on the good-guy or the black cape on Darth Vader. In the third Star Wars Film, Return of the Jedi, Luke shows up as a good guy but with black clothing. This symbolizes the duality of his character-he has both good and bad in him, but he controls the bad. Thus, symbolism is an important and useful type of metaphor.

Synecdoche is a comparison that substitutes a part of something for the whole thing. Typical synecdochical references are "thirty head of cattle," or "all hands on deck." In the first example, the cow heads represent the whole bodies of the cattle. In the second, a much better figure of speech, not only do the hands represent the sailors, but focus on the work that the sailors will be doing with their hands. To say "all hands on deck" is usually to say that it is time to work.

Metonymy is a close relative to synecdoche in that it uses things that are associated with one another. Some examples are, "the White House agreed to sign the bill," or "What does Salt Lake say about plural marriage?" In these examples the White House represents the president, and Salt Lake represents the general authorities of the Church, and through metonymy, a writer can invoke all the symbolism of the building or all the history of the promised city of the Saints.

Analogy is a wonderful, logical comparison that creates the same kind of relationship as exists in a simile, but extends it beyond one point of correspondence. In other words, if a fourteen-year-old is like a sloth, then we have one point of comparison at a time: laziness, for example. An analogy is often an extended simile, where we have multiple points of comparison, such as "life is like a box of chocolates" from Forrest Gump. How is life like a box of chocolates? One is not always certain what one will get, and sometimes it is a pleasant surprise, sometimes a horrifying shock, and sometimes it just does not matter. It is important to note the multiple possibilities that exist in analogy that are more limited in simple similes and metaphors.

An allegory is an extended simile (the kingdom of God is like unto an olive tree), but with real-life equivalents. If a fourteen year old is like a three-toed sloth, then the allegorical elements of this comparison would be that the moss on the sloth's back is bad habits caused by inactivity, the stunted reflexes are the numbed ability to recognize damaging behaviors, the poor diet of leaves would be allegorically equivalent to a poor diet of potato chips and ding-dongs.

Rhyme is the repetition of a vowel-consonant combination at the end of words. But you've heard rhyme since you were a child: "Fox in socks on box on Knox" (Dr. Seuss). When words look like they should rhyme but don't, we call it sight rhyme(rough-through, love-move) and when the rhyme is close we call it near rhyme or slant rhyme (end-fiend, groaned-crooned). End rhyme, the most common type in poetry, occurs at the end of lines, as demonstrated by this poorly written passage:

I saw the trees swing in the breeze It made me shake in my knees.

"Breeze" and "knees" create an end rhyme. The first line of this passage also has internal rhyme, or rhyme that occurs within a line of poetry, with the words "trees" and "breeze." When a poem has a pattern of end rhyme, we call it a rhyme scheme. Rhyme scheme frequently helps determine what is a stanza, or a poetry paragraph. For example, the following poem is broken up into four-line stanzas by the pattern of the rhyme. To better talk about rhyme, we usually label the different types of rhymes with letters starting with "A." Here's part of a poem by Robert Herrick with the rhyme scheme marked:

Robert Herrick
RobertHerrick

Robert Herrick (1591-1674)

Gather ye rosebuds while ye may,

Old Time is still a-flying;

And this same flower that smiles to-day

To-morrow will be dying

The glorious lamp of heaven, the sun,

the higher he's a-getting.

The sooner will his race be run,

And nearer he's to setting.

 

A

B

A

B

C

D

C

D

 

Lines don't have to rhyme in order to be broken into stanzas. They can be in free verse, as in Langston Hughes' poem, "Harlem." The poem begins and ends with one-line stanzas. In the middle is a seven-line stanza, followed by an unrhymed couplet.

Langston Hughes
Harlem

What happens to a dream deferred?

Does it dry up Like a raisin in the sun?

Or fester like a sore- And then run?

Does it stink like rotten meat?

Or crust and sugar over- Like a syrupy sweet?

Maybe it just sags like a heavy load.

Or does it explode?

LangstonHughes

Langston Hughes (1902-1967)

Rhythm is the other major pattern of creating order in poetry. The rhythm in poetry is just like the rhythm in music-it's just a regular pattern or beat. When we have a specific type of rhythm that is repeated, we call it meter. In part, we label meter by the type of metrical foot or unit of stressed and unstressed syllables.

Rhythms
Name	Pattern	Example
Iambic	ˇ∕ (soft-hard)	attempt, Michelle, awake
Trochaic	∕ ˇ (hard-soft	Russell, Henry, hammer
Anapestic	ˇˇ∕ (soft-soft-hard)	unabridged, contradict, understand
Dactylic	∕ ˇˇ(hard-soft-soft)	Jessica, Jefferson, buffalo
Spondaic	∕ ∕ (hard-hard)	Oh no!, shortcake, breakdown (this rarely occurs with a single word, but with two single-syllable words)
Under the "Name" column are the different types of metrical feet. The "Pattern" column tells you which syllable to stress, that is, you say the "hard" syllable with more emphasis. Say a few of words in the "Example" column out loud. You should hear similarities in their pronunciation.

If you studied poetry in high school, meter was probably the scariest thing to learn. Students frequently say they can't hear the difference in stresses. However, if you've ever had your name pronounced incorrectly, you know there is a difference in stresses. If you call someone jus-SEEK-uh instead of JESS-i-ca, she would probably correct you.

A good way to remember meter patterns is in the following poem by Samuel Taylor Coleridge, "Lessons for a Boy." The accents are highlighted for demonstration:

Trochee trips from long to short; From long to long in solemn sort Slow Spondee stalks, strong foot!, yet ill able Ever to come up with Dactyl's trisyllable. Iambics march from short to long. With a leap and a bound the swift Anapests throng.

The pattern of the meter is only half the story. To describe meter, we also need to count how many specific feet occur in a line of poetry. If a line has only one foot (whether it be iambic, trochaic, anapestic, etc.), we call it monometer. A line with two feet is called dimeter. A line with three feet is trimeter; four feet is tetrameter; five feet pentameter; six feet hexameter; seven feet is heptameter; and eight feet is octameter. We then put the two descriptors (the meter pattern and foot pattern) together to come up with the meter. The following example, from Wordsworth's "Daffodils," is in iambic tetrameter, or four feet of iambic meter.

I wan-dered lone-ly as a cloud

That floats on high o'er vales and hills

When all at once I saw a cloud

A host, of gold-en daf-fo-dils

Other elements include alliteration, assonance, and consonance. Alliteration is the repetition of consonant sounds at the beginning of words; assonance is the repetition of vowel sounds anywhere in the word. Consonance is the repetition of any consonant sound anywhere in the word; thus, alliteration has consonance at the beginning of words. Examples of all three are seen in Tennyson's "The Splendor Falls":

The splendor falls on castle walls And snowy summits old in story; The long light shakes across the lakes, And the wild cataract leaps in glory. Blow, bugle, blow, set the wild echoes flying, Blow, bugle; answer, echoes, dying, dying, dying.

Alliteration, consonance, and assonance are commonly used in prose, and this tactic allows prose to sound more lively and crafted than it would if it were written like computer instructions. Elder Maxwell loved alliteration, assonance, and consonance, and reading any of his talks usually gives anyone an opportunity to see these literary elements in action. A clear example is in an address entitled "Patience," given at BYU in November 1979:

Patience is not only a companion of faith but is also a friend to free agency. Inside our impatience there is sometimes an ugly reality: We are plainly irritated and inconvenienced by the need to make allowance for the free agency of others.

Such literary crafting unifies a text and gives it a little flavor that it might not otherwise have.

Perspective is another important literary element. Stories are always told from a narrator's point of view; this creates a limited perspective for the reader because the story is given from one perspective.

We will consider three types of perspective and four types of narrators.

First person. The narrator is talking about himself (I, me, us, we). This is usually reserved for journals, letters, and other personal types of writing like autobiographies and personal essays.
Second person. The narrator is talking to one other person (you). These are reserved for letters, mostly, and very unusual narratives that address the audience directly.
Third person. The narrator is talking to someone about another person (he, she, they, him, her, them, etc.). Third person is the most common point of view in literature.
The types of narrators are:

Omniscient. The narrator knows all the thoughts and feelings of all the characters, as well as knowing everything that has, is, or will go on.
Partial omniscience. The narrator only knows what is going on the mind of one character, or one set of characters.
Innocent. A naive narrator, whose inexperience leaves his or her interpretations of events, conversations, and actions up to debate.
Unreliable. An innocent narrator is a type of unreliable narrator; this term is usually reserved for those narrators who are either so astronomically stupid they cannot be trusted, who are duplicitous and therefore are lying all the time, or who are insane and thus are not interpreting anything the way it should be done.
Literature falls into two other categories:

OPEN AND CLOSED FORM

These categories are most often seen in poetry but can also apply to fiction and other prose genres as well. Closed form literature has rules that create a certain form. A sonnet is an example of a closed form. There are several different types of sonnets, but they all consist of fourteen rhymed lines of

IAMBIC PENTAMETER

The sonnet also includes a turn (called a volta in Italian). The turn marks the change between the two parts of the poem. This may include a question and its answer, a situation and thoughts on the situation, an idea and application of the of the idea, or the thoughts of two different speakers. Consider this sonnet by William Shakespeare. Notice the meter and the rhyme scheme. Where does the turn come?

Let me not to the marriage of true minds

Admit impediments. Love is not love

Which alters when it alteration finds,

Or bends with the remover to remove:

O, no! it is an ever-fixed mark,

That looks on tempests and is never shaken;

It is the star to every wandering bark,

Whose worth's unknown, although his height be taken.

Love's not Time's fool, though rosy lips and cheeks

Within his bending sickle's compass come;

Love alters not with his brief hours and weeks,

But bears it out even to the edge of doom.

If this be error and upon me proved,

I never writ, nor no man ever loved.

Free verse is an example of an open form. Free verse is poetry that conforms to no restrictions, and thus can be anything it wants. One such poem is "I Dream'd in a Dream," by Walt Whitman:

I Dream'd in a Dream

I DREAM'D in a dream I saw a city invincible to the attacks of the whole of the rest of the earth,

I dream'd that was the new city of Friends,

Nothing was greater there than the quality of robust love,

it led the rest, It was seen every hour in the actions of the men of that city,

And in all their looks and words.

It should be apparent that free verse is just that: free. It does its own thing and hopes for the best. It is difficult to identify rhyme, rhythm, and meter in free verse poetry, but it sometimes can be done with a lot of work.

Blank verse falls between open and closed. Blank verse is unrhymed iambic pentameter. Much of Shakespeare's plays are in blank verse, including Macbeth's monologue.
