Let's begin our discussion of the Renaissance by considering what life was like in 1453. For one thing, there was no America. Or at least there was no knowledge of it in the European world, and no knowledge of the European world in America. Those two cultures had not yet been introduced. It is hard for us to imagine America without the Europeans. But it is also hard for us to imagine Europe without America. Think of Ireland without potatoes, France without coffee, Switzerland without chocolate, and Italy without tomatoes! All of these commodities were from the New World, and Europe did not yet know about them.

Europe did not yet know about a lot of things in 1453. By 1453 spectacles had been invented, but the microscope and telescope had not. The smallest living things anyone knew about were fleas and lice and flecks of pollen large enough to be seen by the naked eye. Scholars believed the world to be round, but thought that the sun, moon, planets, and stars all revolved around the earth. This was not just popular belief, but the official doctrine of the Catholic Church, to which everyone in Western Europe belonged in 1453. It was an ignorant, superstitious, and rather cruel world. In the century before 1453, thousands of people were burnt at the stake for witchcraft. Even learned men believed in dragons and unicorns. When the people of the day encountered cotton for the first time and were told it grew on a plant, they imagined it must be from a sheep that grew like some kind of vegetable. Such was the state of science in 1453.

medieval Conception

Medieval conception of a cotton plant

In 1453 most people lived on farms, plowing the soil with oxen and donkeys and sowing seeds by hand. If you were a peasant, you worked fields owned by a nobleman and paid rent to him for the privilege, either in cash or in goods. You also had to pay tithes to the church and donate time working on church land, both of which were deeply unpopular. After the taxes and tithes, you got to keep the rest you grew, which wasn't much. Usually you were lucky to raise enough grain to use as seed to start over the next year. Famines were widespread.

Peasants lived in houses framed in wood and plastered with a mixture of mud, straw, and manure, called cruck. At night you brought the farm animals inside with you, because your farm was surrounded by a wild forest and the forest was full of wild animals. None of these animals were toilet trained, but then neither were you. If you practiced good medieval hygiene, you went to the bathroom in a bucket that you emptied into the river in the morning. This was the same river where you got your drinking and cooking water. There was no running water, no soap, no shampoo. Everybody had lice, even kings and popes. Nobody had even imagined there was such a thing as germs.

By 1453, there were a number of towns and a few biggish cities. Venice was probably the largest with around 120,000. London had a population of about 50,000 (just about the size of Idaho Falls). In all of England, there were about two million people (today there are over seven million in London alone). Actually the population of Europe was smaller than it had been a little over a century before. In 1348, the bubonic plague, known to the world as the Black Death, arrived in Italy on merchant ships from the Middle East, carried by fleas living on infected rats. It caused one of the most devastating pandemics in history. In the first wave of plague, at least a third of the population of Europe died. Entire towns were wiped out and monasteries were abandoned. There was no germ theory of medicine, and no one had any idea what to do about it. So people got it or didn't get it. When they got it, they died or recovered. After everyone in an area had been exposed, the plague would run its course and move on to someplace else. Later on, when the area had recovered and there was a sizeable population that had missed it the first time round, it would return to wreak more havoc. Thus it continued for the next four hundred years, keeping the population of Europe from climbing out of the rut it had dug.

The Triumph of Death painting by Pieter Bruegal, the scene is a field filled with carnage and death

triumph Of Death

Pieter Bruegal, The Triumph of Death, 1562

But in 1453 three things happened that signaled the end of an era. Constantinople fell to the Turks. The last battle of the Hundred Years War was fought. And Johannes Gutenberg published books printed with moveable type.

The Fall Of Constantinople It's hard to imagine today the importance of the fall of Constantinople to the medieval mind. Constantinople was an ancient Greek city, originally called Byzantium. It was situated in what is today called Turkey, on the European side of a narrow straight of water, called the Hellespont, between Europe and Asia. It was here, according to Greek mythology, that Leander took a nightly swim to see his beloved Hero, until he drowned in a storm and Hero plunged herself into the waves after him. (Leander's swimming the Hellespont was thought mere fantasy until the English poet Lord Byron proved it possible by doing it himself.) It was also here that the Persian King Xerxes built two bridges out of boats to cross the strait when he invaded Greece in 480 BC. Seven centuries later the Roman emperor Constantine, tired of the squalor and disorder of Rome, moved his imperial palace to Byzantium and renamed it, after himself. Now it was Constantinople, not Byzantium.

Before a century had passed, however, the Roman Empire had been split in half, the western half with its capitol in Rome, the eastern with its capitol in Constantinople. The western half fell to barbarians in 476, and Rome would never again rule an empire. But the eastern half persisted for another thousand years, the length of the entire Middle Ages. Throughout this time everyone called it the Eastern Roman Empire, although a better name was the Byzantine Empire, since it no longer had anything to do with Rome. In 1453, Mehmed II, Sultan of the Ottoman Turks, besieged it and took it, and whatever was left of the Roman Empire vanished into the sands of time. The Turks eventually gave the city a Turkish name, and now it's Istanbul not Constantinople.

siege Of Constantinople

Siege of Constantinople by Phillippe de Mazerolles, there are soldiers advancing up a wall climbing ladders while soldiers attack the advancing soldiers

Phillippe de Mazerolles, Siege of Constantinople, 1450-75

The fall of Constantinople was momentous for more than symbolic reasons. The Byzantine Empire had been a haven for ancient art, culture, and learning. The ancient Greeks had represented the pinnacle of artistic and cultural achievement, and the Romans had brought the Greek culture west and spread it throughout Europe. When Rome fell in the fifth century, Western Europe slid into the Dark Ages and much of this learning and culture was lost. But it was preserved in the east, in the manuscripts and art collections of the wealthy and learned citizens of Constantinople. When Constantinople fell, many of these citizens escaped on Italian ships, carrying their books and art with them. Most of them settled in Italy, and as we shall see, contributed to a rage for all things ancient that was sweeping the Western world.

The Hundred Year War The Fall of Constantinople in 1453 ended a centuries-long battle between the Muslim world and the Byzantine Empire. The same year saw the end of another enduring conflict, the Hundred Years' War. This war was mostly about the kings of England insisting that they should also be the kings of France. They made the argument with genealogy charts, but they enforced their point of view with the sword, or more accurately, with the bow. The Hundred Years' War saw the end of medieval warfare, which was built on the principle of big knights in impervious armor smashing into each other in a sporting fashion and lopping off the heads of any foot soldier who happened to get in the way. It was all very gentlemanly (or chivalrous, from the French word chevalier, or knight)-or at least it was if you were not a foot soldier. If a knight's opponent fell off his horse, the knight was supposed to get off too. If he begged for mercy, it should be granted to him, providing he was willing to admit that his opponent's ladylove was the most beautiful woman in the world.

In the Hundred Year's War, the English longbow changed all of that. At Crécy a much larger force of mounted French knights was decimated by massed English longbowmen-the French knights suffered 5000-10,000 casualties, while only a few hundred English bowmen perished. The longbow won the day again at Poitiers and at Agincourt, and the era of the armored knight was over. By the end of the war the longbow itself was outmoded as gunpowder began to appear on the European stage.

battle Of Agin court

The Battle of Agincourt by Brian Palmer, this painting shows two advancing armies colliding with each other

Brian Palmer, The Battle of Agincourt,

In the end the French managed to win the war, but only when they turned it over into the hands of a visionary young woman named Joan of Arc who led a citizens' army against the English invaders. The English captured Joan and burnt her at the stake, but the spark of French resistance had been led, and soon the English only held a small fortress at Calais on the English Channel. The final battle of the Hundred Years War was fought in 1453; although, the English were in denial for several centuries more-if you look at the dedication page of your King James Bible you'll notice that the translators are still calling James the King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland.

Moveable Type The Hundred Years War and the fall of Constantinople changed the fate of empires. But Johannes Gutenberg changed the way we read, the way we write, and the way we think. Gutenberg was a goldsmith, and it was his interest in metal and metal alloys that led him to experiment with a process of mass-producing moveable type. Before Gutenberg, the only effective way to reproduce a written text was to hand copy it. Throughout the Middle Ages one of the main duties of a monk was to make copies. This became a great art form, and monasteries produced stunningly beautiful manuscripts.

book Of Hours

Book of Hours. A very old print book with lettering that has become so faded it is not readable

Valencia, Book of Hours, 1460

But the difficulty of the copying process kept books rare and expensive. If you were a student, the main thing you did was travel around to the places where the books were and listen to a lecturer read them aloud. No one, not even the rich, had a private copy of the scriptures. Reading was an exotic art, and the transmission of stories, poems, songs, and knowledge was mainly an oral tradition.

Gutenberg often gets the credit for inventing moveable type, but actually it had seen limited use for several centuries in China and Korea. But Gutenberg mechanized it and made it into a lucrative business. First he invented a process for mass-producing his type using an alloy of lead, tin, and antimony, the same components that are used today. He invented an oil-based ink that produced characters that were sharper and clearer than anything seen before. He invented a press based on the screw action used by olive and wine presses of the day. Most important, he combined all of these inventions into a process that made the mass production of books and other written documents economically viable for both printers and customers. Gutenberg's first big project was a Bible, renowned to this day for its beauty and precision.

page From Gutenbers Bible

A page from Gutenberg's bible, the lettering and artwork are ornately crafted onto the page.

A page from Gutenberg's Bible

Within a generation of Gutenberg's big idea, books were flooding Europe. Soon reading was commonplace, at least among the educated. Writers wrote for publication, knowing that their works would receive a wide audience. Politicians, theologians, philosophers, and scientists wrote to be read by an ever-growing audience. Before the invention of the printing press the main way for transmitting ideas was to talk about them. Now print became the vehicle for transmitting complex ideas. More than that, writing became a way of thinking, and reading a way of understanding someone else's thoughts. Writing made it easier to formulate a long, well-reasoned argument, and reading made it easier to follow one. Printed books could have a wide audience, and thus learned men from all over Europe were able to exchange ideas on an unprecedented scale. It is no exaggeration to say that today we think the way we think and know the things we know, thanks to Herr Gutenberg's invention, which was well underway by the year 1453.

