Music
When Aristotle spoke of the music of a tragedy, he meant actual music. Much of the Athenian tragedy was sung, or at least declaimed in a rhythmic style more akin to singing than to everyday speech. Instruments played a part as well, especially the aulos, a loud, nasal woodwind that accompanied the chorus. Various other instruments might be brought in for special numbers, effects, scene changes, preludes, interludes, and postludes. Music in the Athenian theatre thus played a role similar to that of modern opera or musicals. In fact, the inventors of opera living in Italy in the 1600s consciously modeled their new style after what they understood the Greek theatre to be.

But today when we think of the music of a play, we include all the audible elements of a performance. The blank verse of Shakespeare's plays gives a musical quality to the performance. Speech can be more or less musical depending on how we use it. The ancient Greeks ascribed magical powers to storytellers like Homer, who not only told great stories, but also modulated his voice and pronounced his words in such a way as to add emotional potency to the literal meaning of the text. The next time you get a chance to listen to a good storyteller, listen to the music of his voice and how it moves your emotions.

Other sounds, besides words and music, also contribute to the overall effect of a play or film. We subconsciously associate certain sounds with places, situations, and emotions. Consider how differently traffic noises make us feel from the sounds of the sea, from a bird's song, or from chirping crickets. Every sound adds to a play's musical orchestration.

In the 1800s, the German composer Richard Wagner started calling his operas Gesamtkunstwerke. This massive word means "total art form," and Wagner used it to mean that his operas consisted of all art forms rolled into one. A Wagner opera started with a story that was made into a play. It was then set to music and performed by singers and an orchestra. The sets and costumes required designers, painters, sculptors, and craftspeople of all kinds. He even had an architect design a special theater just for his operas. Wagner insisted that by his lifetime all of the individual art forms had exhausted their individual potentials. In other words, music by itself had done everything it could do. From now on, Wagner believed, artworks would only have meaning as they combined with each other, and these total art forms were the artwork of the future.

Wagner was certainly wrong in that there was nowhere left for the individual art forms to go, and much great music, literature, and visual art has been created since his time. But his idea of a total art form was prophetic in the case of modern cinema. The movies of the 20th and 21st century combine all of the arts in a way that is remarkably similar to Wagner's operas. All you need to do is watch the final credits to see how much varied talent is poured into today's films. The Academy Awards currently recognizes categories in acting, direction, screenplay, editing, makeup and hairstyle, music, production design, sound editing, sound mixing, visual effects, and animation.

Out of all of these, music is perhaps the most important, and it is possibly the most potent in creating emotional ambiance and effect in a film. Imagine Psycho without Bernard Hermann's screeching violins, or Star Wars without John Williams' heroic tunes. Music can add to the cathartic effect in a serious film, building suspense and then releasing it at exactly the right moment. Watch as Alfred Hitchcock uses the repetition of a simple song to build tension in his movie, The Birds. In the film to this point there have been several unexplained bird attacks, and one man has been found dead. Tippi Hedren has come to the school to get her friend's children and bring them home. But she has to wait for singing time to end.

Film Title: The Birds

Description: A simple song builds tension towards a climax.

Director: Alfred Hitchcock


(02:32 mins, "Crows on the Playground" TranscriptLinks to an external site.)

Certain types of music can be associated with a specific place or time, and can signal that place or time to an audience. The "Marseillaise" means we're in France; whereas, lots of bass voices singing in minor means we're in Russia. Jazz signifies the 1920s, Big Band music the 1940s, rock and roll the 50s, the Beatles the 60s, and disco the 70s. What music do you think film composers will use fifty years from now to summon up our time?

Wagner associated specific tunes-he called them Leitmotive, or "leading motives"-with specific characters, objects, or ideas. This technique has been exploited in the 20th century. A certain tune will appear when we meet a specific character or encounter a specific idea, and then return every time that character or idea enters or even is referred to. In many cases the tune changes according to the changes of a character. In its first manifestation it might be jaunty or heroic. Later, when the story turns tragic, it can be transmuted to become wistful or sad.

John Williams created the "Imperial March" for The Empire Strikes Back to accompany a scene that showed Darth Vader aboard a star destroyer surveying the Imperial Fleet.

Film Title: The Empire Strikes Back

Description: The "Imperial March" accompanies Darth Vader as he surveys the fleet.

Director: Irvin Kershner


(03:01 mins, "The Imperial March" TranscriptLinks to an external site.)

Throughout the next two Star Wars films, this tune returned almost every time Vader appeared or the Empire was mentioned. At the end of Return of the Jedi, as Vader lies dying in Luke's arms, a flute, then a horn, then a harp play brief reminiscences of the tune.

Film Title: Return of the Jedi

Description: A reminiscence of the "Imperial March" accompanies Darth Vader's death.

Director: Richard Marquand


(02:18 mins, "Darth Vader's Death" TranscriptLinks to an external site.)

Some movies are characterized by a specific song. Sometimes this song is written specifically for the movie. "Chim Chim Cher-ee," for instance, won the Best Original Song Oscar for Mary Poppins in 1964 and became a big hit.

Film Title: Mary Poppins

Description: Dick Van Dyke sings "Chim Chim Cher-ee."

Director: Robert Stevenson


(01:13 mins, "Chim Chim Cher-ee" TranscriptLinks to an external site.)

Other times movie makers will take a popular song of the day and make it part of their movie. A critical ingredient inCasablanca, for instance, is the song "As Time Goes By." This song was not written for the movie, but the movie makes brilliant use of its sentimental potential, and the song and the movie are indelibly connected in our minds.

Film Title: Casablanca

Description: Ingrid Bergman asks Sam to play "As Time Goes By" again.

Director: Michael Curtiz


(01:23 mins, "Play as Time Goes By" TranscriptLinks to an external site.)

There are two major types of film music: underscoring, where an invisible instrument or ensemble plays music to accompany the action, and source music, where the music is emanating from a source that is actually part of the action. For instance, someone may be singing or playing outside a window, or a dance band might be performing, or someone even may be listening to a radio. "The Imperial March" is an example of underscoring, but Sam playing in Casablanca, or the children singing in The Birds, are examples of source music. Sometimes source music will transition directly to underscoring, and a song will be performed by someone in the film and then be picked up by an orchestra as underscoring. In musicals like Mary Poppins, the singer will be part of the action, but the accompaniment will be an invisible orchestra. It's all part of the magic that film and music create for us.

Spectacle
Opera was created in 1600 with the aim of recreating Greek theatre. The inventors were primarily interested in the relationship between words and music, but almost immediately opera became associated with grand visual representations as well. Opera lovers built theatres that were especially designed for visual effects: spectacular scenery, gorgeous costumes, special effects, ballet, machines, extras, even dogs, horses, camels, and elephants.

Of course all of this cost money, and it has made opera throughout its history heavily reliant upon the patronage system. To realize it the way it should be done, there has to be either a wealthy nobleman willing to spend a big chunk of his treasure, or a group of wealthy donors, or a socialist-type government contributing a heaping helping of government funds, or a large audience willing and able to pay an exorbitant price for tickets. Usually it is a combination of some or all of the above. The very cost of opera has done two things to it-first, it has kept it a rather exotic art form that does not occur often and does not occur at all in thinly-populated or less-affluent areas. Second, it has made it into an art form for the wealthy. This then adds what is perhaps opera's fourth element-its social function. Often, people go to the opera not as much to see as to be seen. If one goes to a play, it means one is sophisticated. If one goes to chamber music concerts, it means one is intelligent. But if one goes to the opera, it means one is rich, and that, of course, is the best thing in the world.

Like opera, film is expensive. According to recent reports, the price tag for Peter Jackson's The Hobbit trilogy has run up to half a billion dollars, more than twice as much as his Lord of the Rings series. But everyone involved considers it money well spent-as of the time of this writing the first installment has already grossed more than a billion dollars in profits. The difference between opera and cinema, then, is the number of ticket-buying patrons. But the appetite for visual spectacle is much the same.

Sometimes the cost of production in a movie comes from making the scenes look as realistic as possible. But often designers and directors stylize the various aspects of a performance to draw attention to important details. For instance the Batman movies of various ilk take place in Gotham City, New York-a nightmarish landscape that summons up the emotional landscape, but not the literal representation of New York City. Sometimes a director will choose to downplay the visual spectacle of a play in order to draw attention to the words and the acting. Many modern productions of Shakespeare, for instance, are done in black shirt and trousers and use nothing but stools and a few props. Likewise many film lovers deplored the introduction of sound, then of color, into the art form, because they drew attention away from what they considered cinema's more important elements.

This gives playwrights, directors, and producers many choices in creating the visual elements of their plays and films. The choices they make determine the style of the production. The filmmaker's choices mainly revolve around what we call cinematography, or the art of shooting film.

Cinema, as an art form, developed from the industrial age-The advancement in photography paved the way for moving pictures; Hollywood refined their system of producing films, which generated an extraordinarily efficient business model. Furthermore, film incorporated sound by the late 1920's; this was, in many respects, the final component in the art form we know today. But cinema, though it borrows elements from photography, theater, and classical music, is an entirely new art form. With the speed and efficiency of the modern age, it has swept the world and allowed more people access to a shared artistic experience.

One of the challenges in dealing with film is a paradox described by the great film star Charlton Heston: "The trouble with movies as a business is it's an art. And the trouble with movies as an art is that it's a business. And it is-and every one of us that makes films struggles with that." In other words, movie production needs to be profitable as well as artistically unique and accepted. Many producers give up on the art entirely and seek only to please and entertain the masses. Others insist on their artistic freedom, often at the cost of bankruptcy and ruin. But occasionally a film maker will achieve both ends.

When we watch a live stage play, we see real live actors, in real time, right in front of us; our view of the action depends mainly on the seat we're sitting in. Cinema, on the other hand, is mediated. This means that the creators of the art-writers, actors, musicians, and technicians-work separately from one another, and the end product we see on the screen is a compilation of the work of others who are probably nowhere around when we see it.One of the most obvious examples of this mediation is the process of editing. Both the picture and the sound are edited. Editors build a single narrative from separate pieces of film that were shot out of sequence. Editors give us a sense of continuity by blending together visual images and sounds to create a sense of reality that is in fact artificial. The truth is, projecting enormous two-dimensional images in darkened rooms filled with other spectators is a strange and powerful experience that doesn't have much to do with real life. But as an audience, we choose to suspend disbelief-we see the flat screen in three dimensions, envision the rest of their bodies when we only see the characters' faces, ignore the chunks of passing time that the film omits, or use our imaginations in a thousand ways to fill in the blanks for the film we are watching.

In many ways, the camera work in film mirrors the techniques of still photographers-form is important and the rule of thirds still applies. But camera work in a film is far different than simply placing a camera in the audience and recording a play. There is a new visual grammar that we have come to know and accept. Consider how changing the distance between a camera and its subject can change the viewer's perspective:


(01:51 mins, "How to Choose Best Shot Size" TranscriptLinks to an external site.)

In film, we can get closer to the face of actors than was ever possible on stage, even with great seats. Notice in the previous clip the interplay between point-of-view shots-where we see through the character's eyes, and reaction shots-where we see a character's reaction to something they've seen. (To make this scene really believable, though, it needs to have some sounds effects, like a buzzing sound that abruptly ceases at the point of impact.)

Here is an explanation by Alfred Hitchcock of how editing can change the meaning of a given shot:


(01:19 mins, "Hitchcock Demonstrates Montage" TranscriptLinks to an external site.)

An establishing shot tells us the time and place of a scene. It is usually a long shot and can visually explain how and where things are taking place. Often the opening of a film consists of a series of establishing shots to give the audience its "bearings" on where we are. What can you tell about the film you are about to watch from this opening establishing shot?

Film Title: The Searchers

Description: Establishing shot for the beginning of the film.

Director: John Ford


(00:51 mins, "The Searchers - Opening Scene" TranscriptLinks to an external site.)

Where the cameras are placed in relation to the characters on the screen can suggest a great deal about how the filmmaker wants us to perceive them. Long-time movie critic Roger Ebert reflected on how, after watching hundreds of movies, he noticed some patterns in communication through camera placement:

In simplistic terms: Right is more positive, left more negative. Movement to the right seems more favorable; to the left, less so. The future seems to live on the right, the past on the left. The top is dominant over the bottom. The foreground is stronger than the background. Symmetrical compositions seem at rest. Diagonals in a composition seem to "move" in the direction of the sharpest angle they form, even though of course they may not move at all. Therefore, a composition could lead us into a background that becomes dominant over a foreground. Tilt shots of course put everything on a diagonal, implying the world is out of balance. I have the impression that more tilts are down to the right than to the left, perhaps suggesting the characters are sliding perilously into their futures. Left tilts to me suggest helplessness, sadness, resignation. Few tilts feel positive. Movement is dominant over things that are still. A point of view above a character's eye line reduces him; below the eye line, enhances him. Extreme high angle shots make characters into pawns; low angles make them into gods. Brighter areas tend to be dominant over darker areas, but far from always: Within the context, you can seek the "dominant contrast," which is the area we are drawn toward. Sometimes it will be darker, further back, lower, and so on. It can be as effective to go against intrinsic weightings as to follow them.

Since a motion picture is shot out of sequence, it is important to make sure that the separate segments are conveying a sense of connection-that the action on the screen is continuous. Aristotle called this process observing the unities of time and place. Failure to do so results in one of the most common errors in cinema, lack of continuity. Here is an example of a simple photographic technique that is central in providing the needed continuity in a scene: If a scene is shot over the course of several days, it is essential that the lighting, props, costumes, and even backgrounds be maintained-otherwise, the spell is broken and the audience will realize that this moment was shot out of sequence.


(02:13 mins, "Film School: Establishing Film Continuity" TranscriptLinks to an external site.)

Montage is a French term that means "putting stuff together." Putting together different segments of film is an effective way to visually tell a story. As was mentioned earlier, the shooting of a movie can be a long and separated process. Frequently, films will have montages consisting of a series of newspaper headlines to give a rapid overview of an event. Combining these images can either compress time, or expand our view of a single incident. The following clip is an example of compressing time to create one of the most moving montage segments of the last few decades:
