The movie Casablanca takes place against the backdrop of the Second World War. To understand much of what goes on in the film, you will need to know a number of things about the war and what was going on at the time of the film.

Casablanca was made in Hollywood for distribution to American audiences. It came out in 1942, shortly after the United States entered the war. Even though the main storyline of the movie is a love story, the film is full of political ramifications. The protagonist, Rick Blaine, is an American living in North Africa, trying to stay out of the conflict in Europe. As such, he is a metaphor for America as a whole, who refused to enter the war for its first two years while Hitler conquered most of continental Europe. Rick's story is that of America, who tries to stay uncommitted, all the while witnessing the Germans'atrocities and the suffering they cause. As with America, in the end events force Rick's hand and require him to take action. Casablanca therefore has a powerful war message for America: our enemies have committed heinous crimes and caused great suffering, we can no longer sit idly by, and the cause is worth fighting for.

The March Toward World War II

Adolf Hitler rose to power in Germany on promises to scrap the Versailles Treaty and free Germany from its bonds. In March 1935, he announced that he was going to restore conscription to rebuild the German army. Soon the German military was much more powerful than the provisions of the treaty allowed. In March 1936 his troops rode into the Rhineland, the region of Germany bordering France that had been demilitarized at Versailles. Wishing to avoid another war, France and Britain did nothing.

In March 1938, after a long campaign of violence staged by the Austrian Nazi party and intimidation by the German government, the Austrian government "invited" German troops to march into Austria. In September, Hitler, promising to gather all ethnic Germans into a single German fatherland, demanded that Czechoslovakia turn over a region bordering Germany, known as the Sudetenland. Czechoslovakia refused, and Hitler threatened war. To avert the crisis, the British Prime Minister, Sir Neville Chamberlain, flew to Munich to meet with Hitler. He returned to London, claiming that he had brought "peace in our time." What he had actually done was give the Sudetenland to Germany in return for Hitler's assurances that he would make no more territorial demands in Europe.

"Peace in our time" - Chamberlain shows the Munich Pact to the British public

Hitler's army marched into the Sudetenland to the well-publicized celebrations of Sudeten Germans. In March 1939 he invaded the rest of Czechoslovakia. The Czechs, weakened by the loss of the Sudetenland, did not resist.

One of the main characters of Casablanca is Victor Laszlo. He is a Czech patriot who publishes tracts against Hitler before the German invasion of Czechoslovakia, and then has to go into hiding after his country falls. He continues publishing against the Nazis and is hunted down by the Gestapo, or German secret police. When the Gestapo catch him they put him in a concentration camp, or prison for political dissenters. This was the pattern throughout World War II. Every time the Germans took over a new country, the Gestapo rounded up anyone who had spoken out against the regime and put them in concentration camps, where they suffered torture, hunger, and often execution. Still, resistance movements sprang up all over Europe, and patriots were rallied by the writings of real people who resembled the fictional Laszlo.

In the summer of 1939, Hitler began to complain of the "persecution" of ethnic Germans by the Polish government. As with Czechoslovakia, Hitler demanded all territory where ethnic Germans lived. Great Britain and France made it clear that they would no longer stand idly by and watch Hitler swallow more European land. Early in the morning of September 1, German forces attacked Poland. World War Two had begun.

The Germans struck with coordinated air and ground assaults, called Blitzkrieg (lightning war). The Poles fought bravely, but were woefully unprepared to deal with modern, mechanized warfare - at Lodz, Polish cavalry was seen charging German tanks.

Polish Cavalry
Polish cavalry in action, September 1939

Most Polish planes and airfields were destroyed in the initial attack, enabling the Luftwaffe (German Air Force) to bomb Poland with impunity.

Great Britain and France declared war on Germany the day after the Polish war began, but did nothing to draw German forces away from Poland. Throughout the rest of the year and into the spring there was virtually no contact between German and Allied ground forces - the British called it the "Phony War," and the Germans the "Sitzkrieg." In April, the Allies attempted to stop shipments of Swedish steel to Germany via Norway, and the German forces invaded and seized Norway and Denmark, routing the Allied forces with more coordinated ground and air assaults. In the Norwegian war the Luftwaffe mauled the British navy, ushering in a new era of air power over sea power.

On 10 May 1940, after a long quiet winter, the German Blitzkrieg struck in the west. The French had placed all their hopes on the Maginot Line, a long series of fortifications along the Franco-German frontier. But the Germans simply bypassed it, as they had in 1871 and 1914. Belgium toppled swiftly, as did Holland and Luxembourg. The French and British troops advanced into Belgium to meet the German troops as they came through, but the Germans penetrated their line through the supposedly impassable Ardennes forest and surrounded them. The French surrendered in droves, while the British abandoned most of their heavy material and fled the continent in a makeshift fleet at Dunkirk. 1.8 million French troops were taken prisoner in 1940, of whom nearly a million were kept in Germany as forced laborers till 1945.

The French government abandoned Paris and fled south, and the Germans marched in.

Frenchmen watch
Frenchmen watch as the Germans enter Paris

By 20 June it was all over. Hitler arrived in Paris and dictated peace terms to the French from the railroad car where the 1918 armistice had been signed. The Germans occupied the northern half of France. The south, and all of France's former colonies (including Morocco, where Casablanca takes place) were governed by a new French government friendly to the Germans, with its capitol in the resort town of Vichy, famous for its mineral springs.

Mineral Water
Mineral water bottled in the French resort town of Vichy

The Vichy government collaborated with the Germans on every point, arguing that cooperation would save France from greater disaster. Before they were through they would allow the deportation of hundreds of thousands of French citizens to serve as forced laborers in the German Reich. They would also preside over the demise of France's Jewish population, shipped off to the east as part of what is now known as the Holocaust, Hitler's slaughter of over six million European Jews.

After the fall of France, the British stood alone against the Germans, who pounded the island nation in a series of massive air raids. Hitler's armies never invaded England, but they did occupy Yugoslavia and Greece, and then, in the summer of 1941, invaded the Soviet Union. All this time America maintained its neutrality, but nevertheless provided arms to Britain and Russia.

In December of 1941 America was brought into the war by the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. Japan, like Germany, was led by a militaristic dictatorship, and dreamed of conquering East Asia and the Pacific. Japan allied themselves with Germany, then attacked the United States Pacific Fleet in Hawaii, hoping to knock out the U.S. and keep them from interfering in their own Blitzkrieg in Asia and the Pacific. The day after the U.S. declared war on Japan, Hitler honored his alliance with the Japanese by declaring war on the U.S.

The ship USS Arizona billowing smoke after being attacked by Japanese bombers
USS Arizona, sinking at Pearl Harbor

The Movie Casablanca The action of Casablanca is set sometime after the fall of France to the Germans and before the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. Rick Blaine is a citizen of the U.S., but he has for some unknown reason fled from the Germans. He takes refuge in French Morocco, administered by the Vichy government but collaborating with the Germans. There he runs a café that caters to refugees like himself. As the opening of the movie explains, people from all over Europe have fled the Germans, following a refugee trail that leads from occupied Europe through Vichy France to its colonies in North Africa, and then on to neutral Lisbon, Portugal, where they can get passage to the Americas. The Germans, however, are trying to stop this flow of refugees, and put pressure on the Vichy officials to deny the refugees passports to Lisbon.

In the film you will meet not only Rick Blaine and Victor Laszlo, but also Ilsa Lund, a young Norwegian girl who falls in love with both of them; Louis Renault, the corrupt French police captain who profits from people's desperation to get out of the country; Major Heinrich Strasser, the German officer who is a guest in Casablanca but who seems to have more power than the French officials; and a host of other savory and unsavory characters who are doing their best to make a living (and sometimes just keep living) in a complicated and dangerous world. Each of these characters represent some major player in the great world conflict: Rick the neutral American, Laszlo the heroic freedom fighter, Strasser the German, Louis the collaborating Frenchman, and Ilsa, one of the countless victims of this terrible war. As with all great drama, the story is about the conflicts they face and the choices they make.
