1453 is one of the dates offered as the beginning of modern times. It's somewhat of an irony that we call this time period the "Renaissance," a term that has less to do with modern things than with ancient things. As you will remember, Renaissance means rebirth, and the things that were being reborn were the artistic values, and in some cases, the artistic styles of ancient Greece and Rome. The artists and philosophers of the Renaissance believed that Greece and Rome had achieved a pinnacle of culture, which was largely lost when Rome fell and Roman civilization deteriorated into the "Dark Ages." The Renaissance thinkers saw the Middle Ages as a time when little or no progress was made in art and culture, and they believed that if their own society were to equal the glories of the past, they would need to study and then implement the art and craft of ancient times.

Hence the name "Middle" Ages-a time between the fall of the great and civilized Roman Empire, and the once-again great and civilized Renaissance, a gaping chasm of barbarism lying between two beautiful and enlightened societies. Of course, most of us no longer feel that way about the Middle Ages-we know it to be a time of rich culture and fervent intellectual activity. But the name stuck, and the Renaissance was indeed a time when artists, philosophers, and theorists did everything they could to uncover, study, and imitate the artistic work of their Greek and Roman forebears.

At its basic level, then, the Renaissance was a nostalgia for the bygone glories of ancient times. Rome had fallen to the barbarians, and its glories sank back into the earth - quite literally, it turns out. For a thousand years the great temples and public buildings of the Roman Forum were used as cattle sheds, until by the 1400s they were buried in manure. When a renewed interest in ancient things took hold of the Italians, they performed massive excavations to bring Roman architecture, sculpture, and mosaic to the surface. As the Italians beheld these recovered works of art, they were astonished at the ancients' apparent love of life and fascination with humanity.

In the Middle Ages, the Catholic Church had taught that mortal man lived in a fallen world. Life was degenerate, man was sinful, God was angry most of the time, and those who carefully followed Church teachings and put their faith in its priesthood could look forward to better things in the life to come. The ancient Greeks believed almost exactly the opposite. To them, life was to be relished. After death you became a shade, a shadow of your former self that spent eternity wandering through Hades yearning for the life you once had. This life was dangerous, frightening, and painful. But it was also beautiful, exciting, and full of opportunities for pleasure.

dionysian
Epictetus, Aulos Player with Dancer, 520-510 BCE

Catholic clergymen and theologians believed heartily in Plato's Doctrine of Ideas during the Middle Ages; like Plato, they saw a gulf between the fallen things of this world and the perfection of the eternal realm. They agreed with the philosopher that the pagan, lustful, Dionysian art of the Greeks and Romans was bad for the soul. Thus, most of the art and music of the Middle Ages was "Apollonian"-based on numerical proportion, it appealed to the mind and avoided the "watering of the passions." Medieval art intended not only to teach men what God is like, but also how to be more like Him.

Stained
Chartres Cathedral, The Belle Verriére, 1180 BCE

HUMANISM The artists of the Renaissance, therefore, discovered in the Greek and Roman arts something that was clearly missing from the Middle Ages-a fascination with human concerns, ideas, and passions. Put simply, in the ancient times man was at the center of art, and in the Middle Ages it was God. In the Renaissance, man once again became the center. This renewed interest in humankind came to be called humanism. This does not mean that people of the Renaissance were any less religious-Renaissance men, like Erasmus, and Isaac Newton, and even Galileo, were often deeply pious. But they now viewed man as God's most noble creation and even hinted that at his best, man could aspire to godhood. Instead of searching for ways to serve God, the humanists sought for the divinity in man and ways to ennoble him.

michelangeloMichelangelo, Sistine Chapel, The Creation of Adam, 1508-12
Pico della Mirandola, a humanist from the Italian city of Florence, wrote that after God had created the earth and placed its vegetable and animal life on it, "the Divine Artificer still longed for some creature which might comprehend the vast meaning of so vast an achievement, which might be moved with love at its beauty and smitten with awe at its grandeur." After considering things, God decided to give man the nature of both the animals beneath him and the gods and angels above him. When God had created the first man, He said to him:

We have given you, Oh Adam, no visage proper to yourself, nor any endowment properly your own, in order that whatever place, whatever form, whatever gifts you can, with premeditation, select these same you may have and possess through your own judgment and decision. The nature of all other creatures is defined and restricted within laws which We have laid down; you, by contrast, impeded by no such restrictions, may, by your own free will, to whose custody we have assigned you, trace for yourself the lineaments of your own nature … We have made you a creature neither of heaven nor of earth, neither mortal nor immortal, in order that you may, as the free and proud shaper of your own being, fashion yourself in the form you may prefer. It will be in your power to descend to the lower, brutish forms of life; you will be able, through your own decision, to rise again to the superior orders whose life is divine.

In the study of history it is hard to sort out causes from effects. For instance, we do not know how much humanism influenced the historical events of the time, and how much events created the climate in which humanism could flourish. One aspect of humanism was a greater emphasis on creature comforts and beautiful things to cheer man's time while here on the earth. These creature comforts were made possible by a trade nexus that brought prosperity to a wide swath of Europe.

In the high Middle Ages, popes called upon kings to carry the Christian cross to the Holy Land in a long and ultimately futile attempt, called the Crusades, to take Jerusalem from the Arab Muslims. As brutal as the Crusades were, they began a long and fruitful exchange between east and west. In the late 1200s Marco Polo traveled with his father and uncle to China, and returned to Venice twenty-four years later to write a book that would inspire generations of Italian merchants.

marco polo
from Maudeville's Book of Marvels, Marco Polo before Kublai Khan, undated

In the 1300s, an industrial revolution of wind and water-powered mills enabled merchants from Flanders (now northern France, Belgium, and Holland) to weave English wool into fine textiles and sell them to Italian merchants. The merchants would transport their goods across the Mediterranean in ships, then outfit camel caravans to East Asia. This journey would take years but would pay off in high dividends to investors. The Italian merchants who made the trades, and the investors who financed them, grew rich and powerful in Italian politics.

One such family of merchants was the Medici of Florence. The Medici prospered in the wool trade and made enough money that in the 1400s they were able to found the Medici bank, which would eventually make them one of the richest families in Europe. With wealth came power, and the Medici produced four popes and became the leading family of Florence. Most importantly, they became ardent supporters of the arts.

Italy in the Renaissance was not a united nation, but was divided into numerous city-states. Its many princes, bishops, dukes, doges, and tin-pot dictators sought to impress each other with their virtù, a word that most easily translates as virtue, but also connotes virility and a host of other manly qualities. The Renaissance prince was expected to be an eloquent orator, a clever statesman, and a bold warrior. He was fearless and terrible in battle, but his fearlessness was tempered with the mercy born of good breeding.

Therefore, he aspired to be both an artist himself and a patron of the arts. He was as skilled in painting, literature, architecture, and music as he was in horsemanship and swordplay. In their imaginations each of these Renaissance princes saw themselves as possible inheritors of ancient Rome, and thus they became interested in everything Roman.

Lorenzo de Medici (1449-1492) was especially magnificent in his virtù (so much so that the Florentines called him il magnifico). Like most of the Medici, Lorenzo ruled Florence indirectly, by dominating, paying off, and threatening members of the city council. Nevertheless, his reign was a golden age for Florence, and his diplomacy brought and maintained a fragile peace throughout Italy.

andrea
Andrea del Verocchio, Bust of Lorenzo di Medici, 1478



He was an ardent supporter of the arts, and his court included such eminent artists as Andrea del Verrocchio, Leonardo da Vinci, Domenico Ghirlandaio, and Sandro Botticelli. He expanded the Medici Library (now called the Laurentian Library, after Lorenzo), and sent agents all over Europe to find, copy, and disseminate Greek and Roman literature. He patronized an Academy of scholars (including Pico della Mirandola) that studied Greek philosophy and attempted to merge the ideas of Plato with Christian doctrine. He also maintained a sculpture garden in which the young Michelangelo received his first serious instruction; the young sculptor was a frequent guest at Lorenzo's table and participated in lively discussion with Lorenzo's Platonic Academy.

To the philosophers of the Middle Ages, God was the ultimate reality, and all the things of this world were emanations of His mind brought forth by His will. There was therefore no contradiction between science and reality - any apparent contradiction was the result of the weakness and even the deception of the senses. Faith was understood to be the careful reasoning that eventually led to the complete understanding of all things. This kind of thinking precluded much emphasis on scientific study - reality lay in the mind, not in the evidence of the physical senses.

But in the late Middle Ages, a new school of philosophy was born, consisting largely of Englishmen, including the Franciscan friars Roger Bacon (c. 1214-c. 1294) and William of Ockham (c. 1388-c. 1248). Instead of believing that truth could only be perceived by the mind, as the Platonists and Catholic scholars taught, Bacon and Occam held that knowledge can only come through empirical observation; meaning, knowledge can only come through the perception of the senses. This did not mean that these scholars were irreligious; rather, they believed the things of God were a mystery that humans could not know but only believe. As Ockham said, "only faith gives us access to theological truths. The ways of God are not open to reason, for God has freely chosen to create a world and establish a way of salvation within it apart from any necessary laws that human logic or rationality can uncover."

This separation into things of knowledge and things of faith had many ramifications, not the least of which was the birth of the modern scientific method. Soon men of science were not just thinking about the physical universe but observing data, taking measurements, and testing hypotheses. The Polish astronomer Copernicus (1473-1543) challenged for the first time the ancient model of the universe that showed the earth at the center of things, and the Italian physicist Galileo (1564-1642) proved Copernicus was correct by making observations with his telescope.

The new emphasis on sensory perception also led to a revitalized realism in the visual arts. Artists now regularly conducted dissections of cadavers in order to learn the exact anatomy of the human body. These dissections would eventually lead to experiments in medicine and human physiology. But they also led to detailed portrayals of the human body in art. Influenced by the Platonic humanists, the human body was no longer seen as evil, but as divine. Therefore, there was nothing embarrassing or obscene about nudity in art. Instead, it was a representation of God's greatest work.

david
Michelangelo, David, 1501-04

Michelangelo's David, although a perfectly formed and strikingly nude young man, is not intended to provoke any kind of carnal response. As President Kimball once said, the statue "inspires to adulation." Of course the same visual media that creates great nudes also can create vulgarity, obscenity, and pornography. Part of this has to do with intent—do the creators intend to inspire to adulation, or entice to lust? But, it also has to do with the content and medium. Michelangelo's David is nude to be sure, but the statue is of such heroic dimensions and imbued with such vision, courage, and nobility of purpose that it is the soul of David, not the mere body, that captures our awareness. In pornography the subject is all about the body alone, or any one or a combination of its various parts. In pornography the parts of the body intrude upon, or mask, or destroy, the spiritual nature of the subject. The subjects of pornography may as well have no spirit, and this is probably why they seem so obscene. It is like looking at death - there is no depth, no truth, no love nor light nor life.

In many times and places when people have been striving for self-mastery, they have come to consider their bodies evil. The aim, they think, is to mortify the flesh, to kill it, at least in a symbolic fashion, so that it can give them no more trouble. They look forward to the day when they will die and be rid of the body, so that they can be truly free. But Doctrine and Covenants 88 tells us that "the spirit and the body are the soul of man." This is a doctrine unique to LDS theology. To everyone else the soul is either equivalent to the spirit, or else it is some kind of ineffable essence that defines us. Most people who believe in a soul believe that when the body dies, the soul is set free, and it returns to God who gave it, or hovers in some other dimension, or loses its individuality and becomes one with the vastness of the cosmos. There are even atheists who think of person as having a soul, even if it is a just a collection of personality traits that will end with death.

But Latter-day Saints believe that our soul is the union of our spirit and our body. Our soul has both a physical and a spiritual dimension. The body is essential to us. In fact, one of the primary reasons we came to earth was to get one. We know that the Father has a body of flesh and bones, as tangible as man's. We know Christ came to earth and received a body, and that after he died he was resurrected and took his body up again. The apostles testified that he ascended into heaven with his body. The resurrection is not some mere spiritual event, like a spirit rising up to heaven to sing in the heavenly choirs. Our bodies shall come forth from the grave and be redeemed, to never be separated from our spirits again. This oneness of spirit and body, this need for a physical as well as a spiritual dimension to our lives, tells us something important about the nature of God, about earth life and about the human condition. The physical body of a human being is beautiful, and we must strive to see the beauty in it without succumbing to the temptation to make it an object of lust and fantasy.

david detail
Michelangelo, David-detail, 1501-04

It is this union of body and spirit, this mixture of humanism and Christianity, that gives the Renaissance its startling new quality. The ancient Greeks loved the human body, but Greek statues were never as full of life as they came to be in the Renaissance. David is not just another pretty face. Seeing him for real in the Accademia in Florence (not just in a photo or a replica), we are swept away by his power and majesty. Mostly it is the eyes that capture us, full of faith, determination, power: virtù. Here is man as he was intended to be, the Platonic ideal of man, armed with faith and the power of God, ready to meet his Goliath. In David we see the perfect union of body and spirit, man as a living soul.

1492 Our second runner-up for a starting date for the Renaissance is 1492. This was an important year for Spain in particular. In the early Middle Ages, Spain was almost entirely conquered by the Moors, Muslims from North Africa. But for half a millennium, Spanish Christian princes had waged a war of reconquest called the Reconquista. In 1492, Granada, the last Moorish citadel, fell. The victors were the two principal Spanish monarchs, Ferdinand of Aragon and Isabella of Castile, who celebrated their victory by getting married and uniting the kingdom of Spain under a single crown.

wedding
The Wedding portrait of Ferdinand and Isabella, 1469
Not content with a nation, Isabella and Ferdinand cast about for an empire. As competition along the trade routes to the east grew increasingly brisk, merchants from other up-and-coming countries in Europe had tried to find ways to compete with the Italians. Prince Henry the Navigator (1394-1460) encouraged his Portuguese subjects to explore the coast of Africa in hopes of discovering a way around. By 1488 the Portuguese had found their way to India along this route. In 1492, the same year she became queen of a united Spain, Isabella hocked her crown jewels to front an Italian explorer named Cristoforo Columbo on his quest to find India by sailing west. To his dying day, Columbus insisted the locals in his newfound colonies were Indians (they weren't), but he had found something much more momentous than a simple trade route. The Spanish went directly from fighting the Moors to conquering the Aztec and Inca empires, transplanting the Christian cross on American soil, and bringing back galleons laden with Mexican silver and Peruvian gold.

SCHISM AND REFORMATION The Catholic zeal that burned in the conquistadors was a product of hundreds of years of crusades against the Moors, but it was also symptomatic of the age. Ever since the late Middle Ages the Catholic Church, once able to unite all of Western Europe in holy war against the Muslims, had declined in prestige. Ever since the Church's earliest beginnings the Bishop of Rome had been the Holy Father, Papa, or "Pope" of Western Christianity. But in 1305, Philip the Fair, King of France, managed to pressure the College of Cardinals into electing a Frenchman, Clement V, to the papacy. Clement, appalled at the civil disorder in Rome and justifiably afraid of his surly Italian congregation, settled down in the southern French resort town of Avignon. By the time he died, he had managed to replace his cardinals with Frenchmen, who diligently elected another Frenchman as pope, and so it went.

papal palacePapal Palace, Avignon

All of France's enemies, including the Italians, the English, and the Germans, were outraged and called the Avignon papacy the "Babylonian Captivity" of the Church. In 1377, Gregory XI moved back to Rome but promptly died. As the College of Cardinals met to choose his successor, a mob gathered outside and demanded that they select a Roman, or at least Italian, pope. They did, but Urban VI turned out to be such a bully that his French cardinals fled back to Avignon, declared his election to be invalid, and elected one of their own as new pope. Now there were two popes, and most of Christianity was bewildered as to which was the right one. Soon each Pope had excommunicated the other and appointed his own cardinals. The situation, called the "Great Schism," persisted until 1417 when the Council of Constance managed to depose both Popes and appoint a new one. By this point, however, the great prestige and power the church had held in the Middle Ages was lost, never to return.

But the new popes of Rome were determined to make up for lost time. First on their agenda was making the papacy independent of any secular authority. To do that, they believed, they needed land and the power to govern it. So the popes went to war, carving out a swath of central Italy, called the Papal States, that would answer only to the pope. Julius II (1503-1513) was especially known for his skills in combat; called the warrior pope, he was more often seen in armor than in liturgical vestments.

But Julius and his colleagues were interested in more than property. Like their fellow Renaissance princes, they wanted to impress their peers with their virtù. The return of the papacy to Rome called for a thorough remodeling of Church headquarters. St. Peter's Basilica was originally built over the burial place of Peter the apostle, held by the Catholic Church to be the first pope. Now the ancient building was to be rebuilt in an unprecedented fashion. Architects, painters, and sculptors were brought in from all over Italy to work on the project. Julius hired Michelangelo to paint the ceiling of the pope's private place of worship, the Sistine Chapel, and later Michelangelo would paint the rear wall and design the new dome that would crown St. Peter's. Raphael would paint murals in the papal apartments, and Bernini would design the ornate Baldacchino, a canopy placed over the tomb of St. Peter. No earthly monarch would ever have a more splendid palace.

st
St. Peters Basilica, Rome

But the wars and the building projects cost money, and the Renaissance popes tended to be rather unscrupulous in how they raised it. In some cases, church offices were sold to the highest bidder; in some places there were tables of fees created for church services, such as baptisms, weddings, and funeral masses. Without doubt the most controversial practice was the sale of indulgences. To understand how this worked, you have to know a little about Catholic theology. A Catholic believes that when a person dies there are three places that person can go: holy people, like saints, go directly to heaven; base sinners go to hell; but most people are neither saint nor sinner. Thus, the average Christian has to spend some time in purgatory where they are punished for un-repented sins.

But in the 1400s, the popes claimed that some saints were so righteous that they actually committed more good deeds than were necessary to get into heaven. These good deeds, the popes said, accumulated in a Treasury of Merits, and the pope had the authority (part of his "bind on earth and in heaven" power) to dispense those merits to paying customers. Thus if your mother died, you could go to a priest and pay him to dispense merits on her behalf, shortening her time in purgatory. This practice raised lots of money and financed the building of St. Peters and the Papal States, but it is easy to see how controversial it would become.

As the story goes, in 1517 an Augustinian friar in the German town of Wittenberg heard a Dominican monk hawking indulgences with a little jingle: "As soon as the coin in the coffer rings, the soul from purgatory springs." Martin Luther (1483-1546) was so incensed that he went home and penned ninety-five theses, or arguments, against the sale of indulgences. The next morning he nailed them to his church door; he also sent them to his bishop. No one needed money to be saved, Luther said, and he who believed that money could save him was surely damned. Thanks to the printing press, Luther's theses were soon all over Europe, and students thronged to Wittenberg to hear Luther speak.

hans
Lucas Cranach the Elder, Martin Luther, 1532


It was not Luther's intention, at least not at first, to make a break with the Catholic Church. He was out to make some theological points and hopefully encourage church-wide reform. Luther's bishop did not respond to the ninety-five theses; instead, he forwarded them to the pope, who employed a group of theologians to examine them. Back and forth the argument went until in 1520 the pope finally excommunicated Luther. In 1521, Luther was called before the Emperor Charles V to defend himself against charges of heresy. Fortunately for Luther the northern German princes were on his side, and they insisted that the Emperor respect Luther's safe conduct. But the break was complete. By the late 1520s, Luther had created a new church in Germany.

Meanwhile other Protestants were even more radical. John Calvin (1509-1564), from Switzerland, abhorred what he saw as Roman idolatry, and his churches were stripped of crucifixes, candles, and artwork. Only the simplest hymn arrangements were allowed. While Lutheranism was mostly restricted to northern Germany and Scandinavia, Calvinism spread throughout much of Europe, including France (where they were called Huguenots), the Netherlands, Scotland (where they were called Presbyterians), and eastern Europe. Our Pilgrim and Puritan forebears were Calvinist and believed that they had come to America to found the New Jerusalem.

calvin
John Calvin


In England, the Protestant Reformation took on a different face. King Henry VIII (r. 1509-1547) was originally a stout persecutor of Protestants and was declared by the pope to be Defender of the Faith. But he ran afoul of Rome when he wanted to divorce his first wife, Catherine of Aragon. Catherine was the daughter of Ferdinand and Isabella and the aunt of the Emperor Charles, who was both King of Spain and German Emperor. Charles pressured the Pope to refuse the divorce, and Henry responded by declaring that the pope no longer had authority in England. Henceforth, the English monarch would be the head of the English Church.

holbeinHan Holbein the Younger, Henry VIII, 1540

By the mid-1500s, Rome realized it was in a crisis. Catholicism was unraveling, and the Protestant faiths were spreading like wildfire. Something had to be done. In 1545, the Pope called a church council at Trent in northern Italy. The Council of Trent was the central event in what has become known as the Counter-Reformation. The subject of the council was to decide how best to combat the Protestants, and perhaps more importantly, how the Church might reform itself in order to address the philosophical and theological challenges they posed. In some cases, doctrine was discussed and defined. The sale of indulgences was abolished. There were extensive reforms against immorality and dishonesty in the church hierarchy. Church music and art were considered, and artists and musicians were encouraged to draw upon the scriptures and strive for piety and intelligibility in their art.

The Counter-Reformation was successful in stemming the tide of Protestantism for at least two reasons. First, it was upheld by the power and influence of Spain. King Philip II saw to it that Protestantism never got so much as a toehold in his realms, and the Spanish Inquisition rooted out and executed every whisper of heresy (Michael Cervetus, a Spanish Protestant and one of the founders of Unitarianism, managed to escape the Inquisition and flee to Switzerland, only to be burnt at the stake by John Calvin). Philip also committed Spain's immense wealth and power to the Catholic cause and managed to drive Protestants out of every area under his influence. Second, the cause of Counter-Reformation was embraced by a new order of friars, the Jesuits. The Jesuits took a special oath of allegiance to the Pope, and became experts at arguing for the Catholic interpretation of scripture and in proselytizing wavering Christians. They wore no specified habit, so they were perfect for undercover and dangerous assignments in the Protestant world, or in exotic places like India or America. They also ran the best schools in Europe, attracting Europe's intelligentsia back to the Catholic fold. By 1600, the Catholics had recaptured southern Germany, Belgium, and Eastern Europe, and had confirmed Catholic power in Italy, France, Spain, and Portugal.

