1 
Our Need
for Living
Prophets
 
 Introduction
 Since the days of adam, one way the lord
has communicated His will to His children
has been through prophets (see amos 3:7 ).
Prophets teach us God’s will and reveal
His divine character. they are preachers of
righteousness and denounce sin, and when
inspired to do so, prophets foretell future
events. Most importantly, prophets bear
witness of Jesus Christ. the lord promised
that if we “give heed” to the words of the
prophet, “the gates of hell shall not prevail
against you; yea, and the lord God will
disperse the powers of darkness from before
you, and cause the heavens to shake for
your good, and his name’s glory” ( d&C
21:4, 6 ). With prophets to guide
us, we can be sure of God’s will
concerning us. We can be assured
that when we follow the counsel
of living prophets, we can better
navigate through the troubled
times we live in.
 Commentary
 The Lord Reveals His Will to Living
Prophets Now as He Did in the Past
	•	 	Elder	Russell		M.	Nelson	of	the	Quorum	
of the Twelve Apostles explained that
from Adam down to the current President
of the Church, prophets have been an
important part of the Lord’s plan:
 “The very fi rst [dispensation of the
gospel] was in the time of Adam. Then
came dispensations of Enoch, Noah,
Abraham, Moses, and others [see Bible
Dictionary, “Dispensations,” 657–58].
 Each prophet had a divine commission
to teach of the divinity and the doctrine
of the Lord Jesus Christ. In each age
these teachings were meant to help the
people. But their disobedience resulted in
apostasy. . . .
 “Thus a complete restoration was
required. God the Father and Jesus Christ
called upon the Prophet Joseph Smith to
be the prophet of this dispensation. All
divine powers of previous dispensations
were to be restored through him” (in
Conference Report, Oct. 2006, 83–84;
or Ensign, Nov. 2006, 79–80; emphasis
added).
◀ The visit of the Father and the Son to Joseph
Smith opened up a new dispensation of the
gospel on the earth.
	•	 	The	fi	nal	gospel	dispensation	
began with the calling of a
prophet—
Joseph Smith.
As in past
dispensations,
God’s will is
given to His
children
through the process of
revelation. President James E.
Faust (1920–2007) of the First
Presidency discussed the
necessity for constant
revelation: “Much revelation
received, in this time as well as
anciently, has been doctrinal.
Some of it has been operational
and tactical. Much of it is not
spectacular. President John
Taylor reminds us: ‘Adam’s
revelation did not instruct
Noah to build his ark; nor did
Noah’s revelation tell Lot to
forsake Sodom; nor did either
of these speak of the departure
of the children of Israel from Egypt. These
all had revelations for themselves ’
( Millennial Star, 1 Nov. 1847, 323)”
(“Continuing Revelation,” Ensign, Aug.
1996, 5; emphasis added)

•	 	President	Hugh		B.	Brown	(1883–1975)	
of the First Presidency described a
conversation he had with a member
of the British House of Commons and
former justice of the Supreme Court
of England, who was not a member of
the Church, about the need for living
prophets and the revelation they receive:
 “[I said,] ‘I am submitting to you in all
seriousness that it was standard procedure
in Bible times for God to talk to men.’
 “[He responded,] ‘I think I will admit
that, but it stopped shortly after the fi rst
century of the Christian era.’
 “‘Why do you think it stopped?’
 “‘I can’t say.’
 “‘You think that God hasn’t spoken
since then?’
 “‘Not to my knowledge.’
 “‘May I suggest some possible reasons
why he has not spoken. Perhaps it is
because he cannot. He has lost the power.’
 “He said, ‘Of course that would be
blasphemous.’
 “‘Well, then, if you don’t accept that,
perhaps he doesn’t speak to men because
he doesn’t love us anymore. He is no
longer interested in the affairs of men.’
 “‘No,’ he said, ‘God loves all men, and
he is no respecter of persons.’
 “‘Well, . . . then the only other possible
answer as I see it is that we don’t need
him. We have made such
rapid strides in education and science that
we don’t need God anymore.’
 “And then he said, and his voice
trembled as he thought of impending war
[World War II], ‘Mr. Brown, there never
was a time in the history of the world
when the voice of God was needed as it
is needed now. Perhaps you can tell me
why he doesn’t speak.’
 “My answer was, ‘He does speak, he
has spoken; but men need faith to hear
him.’
 “Then we proceeded to examine what
I may call a ‘profi le of a prophet.’ . . .
 “The judge sat and listened intently.
He asked some very pointed and
searching questions, and at the end of the
interview he said, ‘Mr. Brown, I wonder
if your people appreciate the import of
your message. Do you?’ He said, ‘If what
you have told me is true, it is the greatest
message that has come to this earth since
the angels announced the birth of Christ’”
(in Conference Report, Oct. 1967, 118, 120;
emphasis added; see also The Profi le of
a Prophet, Brigham Young University
Speeches of the Year [Oct. 4, 1955], 4–5, 8;
or “The Profi le of a Prophet,” Ensign, June
2006, 36–37, 39).
 Today’s Problems Are Met with Divine
Solutions
	•	 	The	Prophet	Joseph	Smith	(1805–44)	
taught that we need continuing divine
direction “adapted to the circumstances” of
the people in this dispensation (see History
of the Church, 5:135). He also taught that
“we are differently situated from any other
people that ever existed upon this earth”
and, therefore, need unique revelation and
direction (see History of the Church, 2:52;
see also Teachings of Presidents of the Church:
Joseph Smith [2007], 195). “We believe all
that God has revealed, all that He does
now reveal, and we believe that He will
yet reveal many great and important
things pertaining to the Kingdom of God”
( Articles of Faith 1:9 ).

•	 In an 1883 revelation given through
President John Taylor (1808–87), the Lord
promised that He would continue to bless
the Church with revelations: “I will reveal
unto you, from time to time, through
the channels that I have appointed,
everything that shall be necessary for the
future development and perfection of my
Church, for the adjustment and rolling
forth of my kingdom, and for the building
up and the establishment of my Zion” (in
James R. Clark, comp., Messages of the First
Presidency of The Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints, 6 vols. [1965–75], 2:354).
•	 President Boyd K. Packer of the Quorum of
the Twelve Apostles reminded Latter-day
Saints that constancy and change in the
Church are both dictated by revelation:
“There will be changes made in
the future as in the past. Whether the
Brethren [the prophet and apostles] make
changes or resist them depends entirely
upon the instructions they receive through
the channels of revelation which were
established in the beginning.
“The doctrines will remain fixed,
eternal; the organization, programs, and
procedures will be altered as directed by
Him whose church this is” (in Conference
Report, Oct. 1989, 19; or Ensign, Nov.
1989, 16).
•	 President John Taylor spoke of the need
for present-day revelation as part of the
Lord’s true religion:
“We believe that it is
necessary for man to be
placed in communication
with God; that he should
have revelation from
him, and that unless
he is placed under the influence of the
inspiration of the Holy Spirit he can
know nothing about the things of God.
. . . Whoever heard of true religion
without communication with God? To
me the thing is the most absurd that the
human mind could conceive of. I do not
wonder, when the people generally reject
President John Taylor
the principle of present revelation, that
skepticism and infidelity prevail to such an
alarming extent. I do not wonder that so
many men treat religion with contempt,
and regard it as something not worth the
attention of intelligent beings, for without
revelation religion is a mockery and a
farce. . . .
“The principle of present revelation
then, is the very foundation of our
religion” (“Discourse by Elder John
Taylor,” Deseret News, Mar. 4, 1874, 68;
emphasis added; see also Teachings
of Presidents of the Church: John Taylor
[2001], 158–59).
Revelation Is Constant in This
Dispensation
•	 President Spencer W. Kimball (1895–1985)
testified that the flow of revelation is
constant in our dispensation: “I say, in
the deepest of humility, but also by the
power and force of a burning testimony
in my soul, that from the prophet of the
Restoration to the prophet of our own
year, the communication line is unbroken,
the authority is continuous, a light,
brilliant and penetrating, continues to
shine. The sound of the voice of the Lord
is a continuous melody and a thunderous
appeal” (in Conference Report, Apr.
1977, 115; or Ensign, May 1977, 78; see
also Teachings of Presidents of the Church:
Spencer W. Kimball [2006], 241)

•	 President George Q. Cannon (1827–1901)
of the First Presidency taught: “This
Church from the day of its organization
up to the present time has never been
one hour, yea, I may say, one moment
without revelation, without having a man
in our midst who can tell us as a people the
mind and will of God, who can point out to
us that which we should do, who can teach
us the doctrines of Christ, who can point
out to us that which is false and incorrect,
and who can, upon all matters that come
within the range of our experience, and
that are necessary for us to attend to give
us the necessary counsel and instruction.
This has been the case always” (“Discourse
by President George Q. Cannon,” Deseret
News, Jan. 21, 1885, 3; emphasis added).
The Lord’s Church Is Built on the
Foundation of Apostles and Prophets
•	 President Gordon B. Hinckley (1910–
2008) testified:
“This is the restored Church of Jesus
Christ. We as a people are Latter-day
Saints. We testify that the heavens have
been opened, that the curtains have been
parted, that God has spoken, and that
Jesus Christ has manifested Himself,
followed by a bestowal of divine authority.
“Jesus Christ is the cornerstone of this
work, and it is built upon a ‘foundation
of . . . apostles and prophets’ (Ephesians
2:20)” (in Conference Report, Oct.
2002, 87; or Ensign, Nov. 2002, 81).
•	 Elder Jeffrey R. Holland of the Quorum
of the Twelve Apostles explained why
the foundation of apostles and prophets
is needed today: “The apostolic and
prophetic foundation of the Church
was to bless in all times, but especially in
times of adversity or danger, times when
we might feel like children, confused
or disoriented, perhaps a little fearful,
times in which the devious hand of men
or the maliciousness of the devil would
attempt to unsettle or mislead. . . . In New
Testament times, in Book of Mormon
times, and in modern times these officers
form the foundation stones of the true
Church, positioned around and gaining
their strength from the chief cornerstone,
‘the rock of our Redeemer, who is [Jesus]
Christ, the Son of God’ [Helaman 5:12]”
(in Conference Report, Oct. 2004, 5; or
Ensign, Nov. 2004, 7).
The First Presidency and the Quorum
of the Twelve Apostles Are Prophets,
Seers, and Revelators
•	 President Harold B. Lee (1899–1973)
taught what it means when we sustain
the First Presidency and Quorum of the
Twelve Apostles as prophets, seers, and
revelators: “All members of the
First Presidency and the Twelve are
regularly sustained as ‘prophets,
seers, and revelators.’ . . . This
means that any one of the apostles,
so chosen and ordained, could
preside over the Church if he were
‘chosen by the body [which has
been interpreted to mean, the entire
Quorum of the Twelve], appointed
and ordained to that office, and
upheld by the confidence, faith, and
prayer of the church,’ to quote from
a revelation on this subject, on one
condition, and that being that he was
the senior member, or the president,
of that body. (See D&C 107:22.)”

•	 President J. Reuben Clark Jr. (1871–1961) of
the First Presidency explained that “some
of the General Authorities
[the Apostles] have had
assigned to them a special
calling; they possess a
special gift; they are
sustained as prophets,
seers, and revelators,
which gives them a special
spiritual endowment in connection with
their teaching of the people. They have the
right, the power, and authority to declare
the mind and will of God to his people,
subject to the over-all power and authority
of the President of the Church” (“When
Are Church Leaders’ Words Entitled to
Claim of Scripture?” Church News, July 31,
1954, 9; emphasis added).
What Are Prophets, Seers,
and Revelators?
Prophet
•	 A prophet is “a person who has been called
by and speaks for God. As a messenger of
God, a prophet receives commandments,
prophecies, and revelations from God.
His responsibility is to make known
God’s will and true character to mankind
and to show the meaning of his dealings
with them. A prophet denounces sin and
foretells its consequences. He is a preacher
of righteousness. On occasion, prophets
may be inspired to foretell the future for
the benefit of mankind. His primary
responsibility, however, is to bear
witness of Christ. The President of The
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints
is God’s prophet on earth today. Members
of the First Presidency and the Twelve
Apostles are sustained as prophets, seers,
and revelators” (Guide to the Scriptures,
“Prophet,” scriptures.lds.org; emphasis
added).
President J. Reuben
Clark Jr.
Seer
•	 A seer is “a person authorized of God
to see with spiritual eyes things which
God has hidden from the world
(Moses 6:35–38). He is a revelator and a
prophet (Mosiah 8:13–16). In the Book of
Mormon, Ammon taught that only a seer
could use special interpreters, or a Urim
and Thummim (Mosiah 8:13; 28:16). A
seer knows the past, present, and future.
Anciently, a prophet was often called a
seer (1 Sam. 9:9; 2 Sam. 24:11).
“Joseph Smith is the great seer of
the latter days (D&C 21:1; 135:3). In
addition, the First Presidency and the
Council of the Twelve are sustained as
prophets, seers, and revelators” (Guide to
the Scriptures, “Seer,” scriptures.lds.org;
emphasis added).
•	 Elder John A. Widtsoe (1872–1952) of the
Quorum of the Twelve Apostles explained:
“A seer is one who sees with spiritual
eyes. He perceives the meaning of that
which seems obscure to others; therefore
he is an interpreter and clarifier of eternal
truth. . . . In short, he is one who sees,
who walks in the Lord’s light with open
eyes [see Mosiah 8:15–17]” (Evidences and
Reconciliations, arr. G. Homer Durham,
3 vols. in 1 [1960], 258).
•	 President Joseph Fielding Smith (1876–
1972) described one of his counselors as one who possessed the gift of seership:
“President Harold B. Lee is a pillar of
truth and righteousness, a true seer who
has great spiritual strength and insight
and wisdom, and whose knowledge and
understanding of the Church and its
needs is not surpassed by any man” (in
Conference Report, Apr. 1970, 114; or
Improvement Era, June 1970, 27).
Revelator
•	 As revelators, the First Presidency and
Quorum of the Twelve Apostles make
known the will of the Lord for the
Church and for mankind in general. They
reveal His will in both spiritual and
temporal affairs, though all things are
spiritual to the Lord (see D&C 29:34).
They teach doctrine, direct priesthood
quorums, guide auxiliaries, supervise
the construction of meetinghouses
and temples, and do whatever else is
necessary so that “the gospel [will] roll
forth unto the ends of the earth, as the
stone which is cut out of the mountain
without hands shall roll forth, until it has
filled the whole earth” (D&C 65:2).
•	 Elder John A. Widtsoe taught: “A revelator
makes known, with the Lord’s help,
something before unknown. It may be new
or forgotten truth, or a new or forgotten
application of known truth to man’s
need” (Evidences and Reconciliations, 258).
Prophets Help Us Build Faith
in Jesus Christ
•	 Listening to and following the words of
the living prophets strengthen our faith
in Jesus Christ (see Romans 10:17). The
Prophet Joseph Smith taught, “Faith
comes by hearing the word of God,
through the testimony of the servants
of God; that testimony is always attended
by the Spirit of prophecy and revelation
[see Revelation 19:10]” (in History of the
Church, 3:379; emphasis added). Prophets
declare the word of God by the spirit of
prophecy so that those who hear may
exercise faith in Jesus Christ.
•	 Because He loves His children, and
“knowing the calamity which should
come upon the inhabitants of the earth”
(D&C 1:17), Heavenly Father provided a
solution: He restored the fulness of the
gospel of Jesus Christ through the Prophet
Joseph Smith. In doing so, the Lord
prepared the way so that “faith . . . might
increase in the earth” (D&C 1:21). He
promised, “Though the heavens and the
earth pass away, my word shall not pass
away, but shall all be fulfilled, whether
by mine own voice or by the voice of my
servants, it is the same” (D&C 1:38). As
we hear the word of the Lord through
the teachings of the prophets and witness
its fulfillment, our faith grows. That faith
brings us peace, hope, and joy, even in a
world racked by doubt, wickedness, and
calamities.
Prophets Teach for Our Benefit
•	 To those tempted to resist the counsel
and warning of the prophets, President
Gordon B. Hinckley offered this assurance:
“Please know that our pleadings are
not motivated by any selfish desire. Please
know that our warnings are not without
substance and reason. Please know that
the decisions to speak out on various
matters are not reached without
deliberation, discussion, and prayer.
Please know that our only ambition is to help each of you with your problems, your
struggles, your families, your lives. . . .
“We have no selfish desire . . . other
than the wish that our brethren and
sisters will be happy, that peace and
love will be found in their homes, that
they will be blessed by the power of the
Almighty in their various undertakings
in righteousness” (in Conference Report,
Oct. 1992, 80; or Ensign, Nov. 1992, 59–60).
Safety Comes in Knowing and Applying
the Teachings of the Living Prophets
•	 The temporal and spiritual dangers
facing the world today are evidence of
how much we need prophetic guidance.
President James E. Faust described how
we can be safe from those dangers: “We
have been promised that the President
of the Church, as the revelator for the
Church, will receive guidance for all of
us. Our safety lies in paying heed to
that which he says and following his
counsel” (Ensign, Aug. 1996, 6; emphasis
added).
•	 Elder Quentin L. Cook of the Quorum of
the Twelve Apostles gave an example of
how a prophetic teaching
protected faithful Church
members from danger:
“Prophets are inspired
to provide us with
prophetic priorities to
protect us from dangers.
As an example, President Heber J.
Grant, the prophet from 1918 to 1945,
was inspired to emphasize adherence
to the Word of Wisdom [see Teachings
of Presidents of the Church: Heber J.
Grant (2002), 189–97], the principle
with a promise revealed by the Lord to
the Prophet Joseph [see D&C 89]. He
stressed the importance of not smoking or
drinking alcoholic beverages and directed
the bishops to review these principles in
temple recommend interviews.
“At that time, smoking was accepted by
society as an appropriate, even glamorous, behavior. The medical profession accepted
smoking with little concern because the
scientific studies linking cigarette smoking
with several kinds of cancer were far in
the future. President Grant counseled
with great vigor, and we became known
as a people who abstained from drinking
and smoking. . . .
“Obeying the Word of Wisdom gave
our members, especially our youth, a
preventive inoculation against drug use
and the resulting health problems and
moral hazards” (in Conference Report,
Apr. 2008, 48–49; or Ensign, May 2008, 48;
emphasis added).
•	 Elder M. Russell Ballard of the Quorum of
the Twelve Apostles warned that because
safety is found in
following the words of the
living prophet, we should
guard against obstacles
that have kept some from
heeding the prophet’s
words:
“It is no small thing, my brothers and
sisters, to have a prophet of God in our
midst. . . . When we hear the counsel of
the Lord expressed through the words of
the President of the Church, our response
should be positive and prompt. History shows that there is
safety, peace, prosperity,
and happiness in
responding to prophetic
counsel as did Nephi of old: ‘I will go
and do the things which the Lord hath
commanded’ (1 Nephi 3:7).
“We know of the experience of
Naaman, who was struck with leprosy
and who eventually contacted the prophet
Elisha and was instructed to ‘go and wash
in [the] Jordan seven times, and thy flesh
shall come again to thee, and thou shalt
be clean’ (2 Kings 5:10).
“At first, Naaman was unwilling to
follow Elisha’s counsel. He couldn’t
understand the thing he had been asked
to do—to wash seven times in the Jordan
river. In other words, his pride and
stubbornness were keeping him from
receiving the Lord’s blessing through
His prophet. Finally he went down and
‘dipped himself seven times in Jordan,
according to the saying of the man of
God: and his flesh came again like unto
the flesh of a little child, and he was clean’
(2 Kings 5:14).
“What a humbling thing it must have
been for Naaman to realize how close he
came to allowing his own pride and his
unwillingness to listen to the counsel of
the prophet to prevent him from receiving
such a great, cleansing blessing. And what
a humbling thing it is to contemplate
how many of us might miss out on great
and promised blessings
because we do not listen
and then do the relatively
simple things our
prophet is telling us to do
today. . . .
“Today I make you
a promise. It’s a simple
one, but it is true. If you
will listen to the living
prophet and the apostles
and heed our counsel,
you will not go astray”
(in Conference Report,
Apr. 2001, 84–85; or
Ensign, May 2001, 65–66;
emphasis added).
•	 President Dieter F. Uchtdorf of the First
Presidency reminded us that blessings
come when we act upon inspired answers
given to us by the prophet:
“We have a living
prophet on the face of the
earth. . . . He knows our
challenges and fears. He
has inspired answers. . . .
“The prophets speak
to us in the name of the Lord and in
plainness. As the Book of Mormon
confirms, ‘the Lord God giveth light unto
the understanding; for he speaketh unto
men according to their language, unto
their understanding’ (2 Nephi 31:3).
“It is our responsibility not only to
listen but also to act upon His word,
that we may claim the blessings of the ordinances and covenants of the restored
gospel. He said, ‘I, the Lord, am bound
when ye do what I say; but when ye do
not what I say, ye have no promise’ (D&C
82:10).
“There may be times when we may
feel overwhelmed, hurt, or on the edge of
discouragement as we are trying so hard
to be perfect members of the Church.
Be assured, there is balm in Gilead. Let
us listen to the prophets of our day as
they help us to focus on the things that
are central to the Creator’s plan for
the eternal destiny of His children” (in
Conference Report, Oct. 2002, 10–11; or
Ensign, Nov. 2002, 12; emphasis added).
One of Our Greatest Needs Is to
Hearken to the Prophets
•	 President Harold B. Lee explained the
value of heeding the prophet’s counsel,
even when our own views may differ from
that counsel: “The only safety we have as
members of this church is to do exactly
what the Lord said to the Church in that
day when the Church was organized. We
must learn to give heed to the words and
commandments that the Lord shall give
through his prophet, ‘as he receiveth them,
walking in all holiness before me; . . . as
if from mine own mouth, in all patience
and faith.’ (D&C 21:4–5.) There will be
some things that take patience and faith.
You may not like what comes from the
authority of the Church. It may contradict
your political views. It may contradict
your social views. It may interfere with
some of your social life. But if you listen
to these things, as if from the mouth of
the Lord himself, with patience and faith,
the promise is that ‘the gates of hell shall
not prevail against you; yea, and the Lord
God will disperse the powers of darkness
from before you, and cause the heavens to
shake for your good, and his name’s glory.’
(D&C 21:6.)” (in Conference Report, Oct.
1970, 152–53; or Improvement Era, Dec.
1970, 126; see also Teachings of Presidents of
the Church: Harold B. Lee, 84–85).
•	 Elder Robert D. Hales of the Quorum of the
Twelve Apostles assured us freedom from
“unnecessary pain” if we
will follow prophetic
counsel: “If we follow the
counsel given by the
prophets, we can have a life
in mortality where we do
not bring upon ourselves
unnecessary pain and self-destruction. This
does not mean we will not have challenges.
We will. This does not mean we will not be
tested. We will, for this is part of our
purpose on earth. But if we will listen to the
counsel of our prophet, we will become
stronger and be able to withstand the tests
of mortality. We will have hope and joy. All
the words of counsel from the prophets
have been given so that we may be
strengthened and then be able to lift and
strengthen others” (in Conference Report,
Apr. 1995, 20; or Ensign, May 1995, 17; see
also Mosiah 2:41; D&C 59:23).
