Chapter 6 - Genernal Conference

 Introduction
 the lord instructed the Prophet Joseph Smith
(1805–44) that “the several elders composing this
church of Christ are to meet in conference . . .
from time to time” for the purpose of conducting
“whatever church business is necessary to be
done at the time” ( d&C 20:61–62 ). about two
months after the organization of the Church, the
fi rst conference was held on June 9, 1830. the
Prophet Joseph Smith recorded the following
concerning this fi rst conference: “Our numbers
were about thirty, besides whom many assembled
with	us,	who	were	either	believers	or	anxious	to	
learn. Having opened by singing and prayer, we
partook together of the emblems of the body
and blood of our lord Jesus Christ. We then
proceeded to confi rm several who had lately
been baptized, after which we called out and
ordained several to the various offi ces of the
Priesthood.	Much	exhortation	and	instruction	
was given, and the Holy Ghost was poured
out upon us in a miraculous manner—many of
our number prophesied, whilst others had the
heavens opened to their view” (in
History of the Church, 1:84–85).
 Just as in 1830, general conferences
continue to provide “much
exhortation	and	instruction,”	and	
“the	Holy	Ghost	[is]	poured	out”	
in these sacred gatherings. this
chapter emphasizes the purposes
of general conferences of the
Church and underscores our role in
accepting the counsel and warnings
of the lord’s servants. as you study
this chapter, evaluate your current
attitudes toward general conference
and consider what you might do
to receive greater spiritual renewal
and personal instructions from the
messages of Church leaders.
 Commentary
 The Purposes of General Conferences
	•	 President David O. McKay (1873–1970)
summarized the purposes of general
conferences: “(1) To inform the membership
of general conditions—whether the
Church is progressing or retrogressing,
economically, ecclesiastically, or
spiritually. (2) To commend true merit.
(3) To express gratitude for divine
guidance. (4) To give instruction ‘in
principles, in doctrine, in the law of the
gospel.’ (5) To proclaim the restoration,
with divine authority to administer in all
the ordinances of the gospel of Jesus
Christ, and to declare, quoting the
Apostle Peter, that ‘there is none other
name under heaven given among men’
than Jesus Christ ‘whereby we must be
saved.’ ( Acts 4:12 .) (6) To admonish and
inspire to continue in greater
activity” (in Conference Report,
Oct. 1954, 7).
 General Conference Provides
Opportunities for Spiritual
Renewal
	•	 	President	Howard		W.	Hunter	
(1907–95) taught that general
conference is a time to
strengthen our testimony and
resolve to improve our lives: “ Conference
time is a season of spiritual revival
when knowledge and testimony are
increased and solidifi ed that God lives
and blesses those who are faithful. It
is a time when an understanding that
Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the living
God, is burned into the hearts of those
who have the determination to serve
him and keep his commandments. 
Conference is the time when our leaders
give us inspired direction in the conduct
of our lives—a time when souls are
stirred and resolutions are made to
be better husbands and wives, fathers
and mothers, more obedient sons and
daughters, better friends and neighbors”
(in Conference Report, Oct. 1981, 15; or
Ensign, Nov. 1981, 12; emphasis added).
•	During the concluding session of the
October 2006 general conference, Elder
Jeffrey R. Holland of the Quorum of the
Twelve Apostles explained that hearing
God’s voice through His servants is vital
to spiritual survival in our day of dangers
and difficulties: “Our times are turbulent
and difficult. We see wars internationally
and distress domestically. Neighbors all
around us face personal heartaches and
family sorrows. Legions know fear and
troubles of a hundred kinds. This reminds
us that when those mists of darkness
enveloped the travelers in Lehi’s vision
of the tree of life, it enveloped all of the
participants—the righteous as well as the
unrighteous, the young along with the
elderly, the new convert and seasoned
member alike. In that allegory all face
opposition and travail, and only the
rod of iron—the declared word of
God—can bring them safely
through. We all need that
rod. We all need
that word. No one
is safe without it, for in its absence any can ‘[fall] away
into forbidden paths and [be] lost,’ as
the record says [1 Nephi 8:28; see also
vv. 23–24]. How grateful we are to have
heard God’s voice and felt the strength of
that iron rod in this conference these past
two days” (in Conference Report, Oct.
2006, 111–12; or Ensign, Nov. 2006, 105;
emphasis added).
The Words of the Prophets Delivered
through the Spirit during General
Conference Are Latter-day Scripture
•	 Scripture is the mind and will of God
revealed through His servants (see
D&C 68:4). The Apostle Peter declared,
“Prophecy came not in old time by
the will of man: but holy men of God
spake as they were moved by the Holy
Ghost” (2 Peter 1:21). Such scripture
has been written and preserved in the
standard works as priceless gems of
eternal truth. However, the standard
works are not the only source of scripture.
Elder James E. Talmage (1862–1933)
of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles
identified the connection between the
standard works and the words of living
prophets: “The Standard Works of the
Church constitute the written authority
of the Church in doctrine. Nevertheless,
the Church holds itself in readiness to
receive additional light and knowledge
‘pertaining to the Kingdom of God’
through divine revelation. We believe
that God is as willing today as He ever
has been to reveal His mind and will to
man, and that He does so through His
appointed servants—prophets, seers, and
revelators—invested through ordination
with the authority of the Holy Priesthood.
We rely therefore on the teachings of
the living oracles of God as of equal
validity with the doctrines of the
written word” (Articles of Faith [1968], 7;
emphasis added).
•	 President Joseph Fielding Smith (1876–
1972) taught about latter-day scripture:
“When one of the brethren stands
before a congregation of the people
today, and the inspiration of the Lord
is upon him, he speaks that which the
Lord would have him speak. It is just as
much scripture as anything you will find
written in any of these records, and yet
we call these the standard works of the
Church. We depend, of course, upon the
guidance of the brethren who are entitled
to inspiration.
“There is only one man in the Church
at a time who has the right to give
revelation for the Church, and that is
the President of the Church. But that
does not bar any other member in this
Church from speaking the word of the
Lord, as indicated here in this revelation,
section 68 [see D&C 68:2–6], but a
revelation that is to be given as these
revelations are given in this book, to the
Church, will come through the presiding
officer of the Church; yet, the word of
the Lord, as spoken by other servants
at the general conferences and stake
conferences, or wherever they may be
when they speak that which the Lord
has put into their mouths, is just as much
the word of the Lord as the writings and
the words of other prophets in other
dispensations” (Doctrines of Salvation,
comp. Bruce R. McConkie, 3 vols. [1954–
56], 1:186).
•	 President J. Reuben Clark Jr. (1871–1961)
explained that we must be worthy and
receive inspiration from the Holy Ghost in
order to know when the Brethren speak
by the power of the Holy Ghost:
“The question is, how shall we know
when the things they have spoken were
said as they were ‘moved upon by the
Holy Ghost’? [D&C 68:3].
“I have given some thought to this
question, and the answer thereto so far as
I can determine, is: We can tell when the
speakers are ‘moved upon by the Holy
Ghost’ only when we, ourselves, are
‘moved upon by the Holy Ghost.’
“In a way, this completely shifts the
responsibility from them to us to determine
when they so speak” (“When Are Church
Leaders’ Words Entitled to Claim of
Scripture?” Church News, July 31, 1954, 9;
emphasis added; see also 2 Peter 1:20–21).
•	 President Howard W. Hunter spoke about
general conference addresses in relation
to latter-day scripture: “Much inspired
counsel by prophets, seers, revelators, and
other General Authorities of the Church
is given during general conference. Our
modern-day prophets have encouraged
us to make the reading of the conference
editions of our Church magazines
an important and regular part of our
personal study. Thus, general conference
becomes, in a sense, a supplement to
or an extension of the Doctrine and
Covenants. In addition to the conference
issues of the Church magazines, the First
Presidency writes monthly articles that
contain inspired counsel for our welfare”
(The Teachings of Howard W. Hunter, ed.
Clyde J. Williams [1997], 212; emphasis
added).
The Benefit and Value of Latter-day
Revelation
•	 President Harold B. Lee (1899–1973)
observed the importance of accepting and
heeding revelation:
“Some of the most profound thinkers
in our generation, other than Church members, have realized the need for
revelations from the Lord in order to give
vitality to the teachings of a church. It
was Ralph Waldo Emerson who said:
“‘The Hebrew and Greek scriptures
contain immortal sentences that have
been the bread of life to millions, but
they do not have epical integrity, are
fragmentary and are not shown in their
order to the intellect. . . . Nor can the
Bible be closed until the last great man
is born. . . . Men have come to speak of
revelation as somewhat long ago given
and done, as if God were dead. That
injury to faith throttles the preachers and
the goodliest of institutions become an
uncertain and inarticulate voice. The need
was never greater for revelation than it is
today.’ [This contains statements from an
address at the Harvard Divinity School,
July 15, 1838, and Representative Men,
“Uses of Great Men.”]
“. . .There have been in this day, our
day, men commissioned of the Lord
with power and authority, and he has
given them the inspiration to teach
and proclaim these things to the world
for the purpose the Lord has set forth
. . . that the important things might be
counseled by the elders of the Church to
this people according to the inspiration
and revelation they receive from time to
time. As the Latter-day Saints go home
from this conference, it would be well if
they consider seriously the importance . . .
of this conference and let it be the guide
to their walk and talk during the next six
months. These are the important matters
the Lord sees fit to reveal to this people
in this day” (in Conference Report, Apr.
1946, 67–68).
•	 President Thomas S. Monson encouraged
us to study the conference addresses
found in the Church magazines: “We
remind you that the messages we have
heard during this conference will be
printed in the . . . Ensign and Liahona
magazines. As we read and study them,
we will be additionally taught and
inspired. May we incorporate into our
daily lives the truths found therein” (in
Conference Report, Oct. 2009, 109; or
Ensign, Nov. 2009, 109; emphasis added).
•	 Elder Lowell M. Snow of the Seventy
compared general conference to the
Liahona, which the Lord provided to
guide Lehi and his family (see 1 Nephi
16:10, 16, 29):
“The Lord provides guidance and
direction to individuals and families today,
just as He did with Lehi. This very general
conference is a modern Liahona, a time
and place to receive inspired guidance and
direction that prospers us and helps us
follow God’s path through the more fertile
parts of mortality. Consider that we are
gathered to hear counsel from prophets
and apostles who have prayed mightily
and prepared carefully to know what
the Lord would have them say. We have
prayed for them and for ourselves that the
Comforter would teach us the mind and
will of God. Surely there is no better time
or place for the Lord to direct His people
than in this conference.
“The teachings of this conference are
the compass of the Lord. In the coming
days you may, as Lehi did, walk out your 
front door and find a Liahona, Ensign, or
other Church publication in your mailbox,
and it will contain the proceedings of this
conference. As with the Liahona of old,
this new writing will be plain and easy
to read and will give you and your family
understanding concerning the ways and
paths of the Lord” (in Conference Report,
Oct. 2005, 101; or Ensign, Nov. 2005, 97;
emphasis added).
We Commit to Heed and Support Those
We Sustain in General Conference
•	 Sustaining Church officers has always
been a part of The Church of Jesus Christ
of Latter-day Saints. The scriptures teach
that “no person is to be ordained to any
office in this church, where there is a
regularly organized branch of the same,
without the vote of that church” (D&C
20:65). In the very first meeting of the
Church, on April 6, 1830, “Joseph [Smith]
asked those present if they were willing
to accept him and Oliver [Cowdery]
as their teachers and spiritual advisers.
Everyone raised their hands in the
affirmative” (Church History in the Fulness
of Times, 2nd ed. [Church Educational
System manual, 2003], 67–68; see also
History of the Church, 1:77). The Lord later
affirmed that “all things shall be done by
common consent in the church, by much
prayer and faith” (D&C 26:2; emphasis
added). We have the opportunity in
general conference to sustain the First
Presidency, the Quorum of the Twelve
Apostles, members of the Quorums of
Seventy, and other general officers of the
Church by common consent.
•	When President Gordon B. Hinckley
(1910–2008) was sustained as the
President of the Church, he explained the
commitment we make when we sustain
our Church leaders:
“This morning we all participated in
a solemn assembly. That is just what the
name indicates. It is a gathering of the
membership where every individual stands
equal with every other in exercising with
soberness and in solemnity his or her right
to sustain or not to sustain those who,
under the procedures that arise out of the
revelations, have been chosen to lead.
“The procedure of sustaining is much
more than a ritualistic raising of the
hand. It is a commitment to uphold, to
support, to assist those who have been
selected. . . .
“Your uplifted hands in the solemn
assembly this morning became an
expression of your willingness and desire
to uphold us, your brethren and your
servants, with your confidence, faith, and
prayer” (in Conference Report, Apr. 1995,
70–71; or Ensign, May 1995, 51; emphasis
added).
•	 Elder David B. Haight (1906–2004) of the
Quorum of the Twelve Apostles spoke of
the covenant we make with God when
we sustain our Church leaders: “When
we sustain the President of the Church by
our uplifted hand, it not only signifies that
we acknowledge before God that he is
the rightful possessor of all the priesthood
keys; it also means that we covenant with
God that we will abide by the direction
and the counsel that come through His
prophet. It is a solemn covenant.”

•	 Doctrine and Covenants 107:22 states
that the members of the First Presidency
are “upheld by the confidence, faith,
and prayer of the church.” On the day
Thomas S. Monson, Henry B. Eyring, and
Dieter F. Uchtdorf were sustained in a
solemn assembly as the First Presidency,
President Eyring taught the following
about what it means to sustain our leaders:
“For us to sustain those who have
been called today, we must examine our
lives, repent as necessary, pledge to keep
the Lord’s commandments, and follow
His servants. The Lord warns us that if we
do not do those things, the Holy Ghost
will be withdrawn, we will lose the light
which we have received, and we will not
be able to keep the pledge we have made
today to sustain the Lord’s servants in His
true Church. . . .
“On this day especially it would be
wise to determine to sustain with our faith
and our prayers all those
who serve us in the
kingdom. I am personally
aware of the power of the
faith of members of the
Church to sustain those
who have been called. In
the last few weeks I have felt in powerful
ways the prayers and the faith of people
whom I do not know and who know me only as someone called to serve through
the keys of the priesthood. President
Thomas S. Monson will be blessed by
your sustaining faith. His family will
likewise have blessings poured out upon
them because of your faith and your
prayers. All those who were sustained by
you today will be sustained by God
because of their faith and yours” (in
Conference Report, Apr. 2008, 20; or
Ensign, May 2008, 21; emphasis added).
•	 The following statement illustrates the
commitment Joseph F. Smith (1838–1918)
had to sustain those he recognized as
the Lord’s servants: “I was called on a
mission after I had served four years on
a homestead and it was only necessary
for me to remain one year more to prove
up and get my title to the land; but
President Young said he wanted me to go
to Europe on a mission, to take charge of
the mission there. I did not say to him,
‘Brother Brigham, I cannot go; I have got
a homestead on my hands, and if I go I
will forfeit it.’ I said to Brother Brigham,
‘All right, President Young; whenever you
want me to go I will go; I am on hand to
obey the call of my file leader.’ And I
went. I lost the homestead, and yet I never
complained about it; I never charged
Brother Brigham with having robbed me
because of this. I felt that I was engaged
in a bigger work than securing 160 acres
of land. I was sent to declare the message
of salvation to the nations of the earth.
I was called by the authority of God on
the earth, and I did not stop to consider
myself and my little personal rights and
privileges; I went as I was called, and God
sustained and blessed me in it” (Teachings
of Presidents of the Church: Joseph F. Smith
[1998], 210; emphasis added).
Our Preparation Affects What We Gain
from General Conference
•	 Elder PaulV. Johnson of the Seventy
described how he learned to make general
conference a priority in his life: “My mother loved general conference.
She always tuned in the radio and TV and
turned the volume loud enough that it
was difficult to find a place in the house
where conference couldn’t be heard. She
wanted her children to listen to the talks
and would ask us from time to time what
we remembered. Once in a while I went
outside with one of my brothers to play
ball during a Saturday conference session.
We would take a radio with us because we
knew our mother might quiz us later. We
would play ball and occasionally take a
break to listen carefully so we could report
to Mom. I doubt my mother was fooled
when we both happened to remember the
same thing from an entire session.
“That is no way to listen to
conference. I have since repented. I
have grown to love general conference,
I’m sure partly because of my mother’s
love for the words of the living prophets.
I remember listening to the sessions of
a particular conference all alone in an
apartment while I was in college. The
Holy Ghost witnessed to my soul that
Harold B. Lee, the President of the Church
at that time, was truly a prophet of God.
This happened before I went into the
mission field, and I was excited to testify
of a living prophet because I had come
to know for myself. I have had that same
witness about each of the prophets since
that time.
“When I was in the mission field, the
Church didn’t have the satellite system,
and the country where I served did not
have broadcasts of general conference.
My mother sent me audiotapes of the
sessions, and I listened to them over
and over again. I grew to love the voices
and the words of the prophets and
apostles. . . .
“Decide now to make general
conference a priority in your life. Decide
to listen carefully and follow the teachings
that are given. Listen to or read the talks
more than once to better understand
and follow the counsel. As you do these
things, the gates of hell will not prevail
against you, the powers of darkness will
be dispersed from before you, and the
heavens will shake for your good” (in
Conference Report, Oct. 2005, 53–55;
or Ensign, Nov. 2005, 51–52; emphasis
added).
•	 President Boyd K. Packer of the Quorum
of the Twelve Apostles emphasized the
importance of our preparation for general
conference: “In a few days there opens
another general conference of the Church.
The servants of the Lord will counsel us.
You may listen with anxious ears and
hearts, or you may turn that counsel aside.
. . . What you shall gain will depend not
so much upon their preparation of the
messages as upon your preparation for
them” (Follow the Brethren, Brigham Young
University Speeches of the Year [Mar. 23,
1965], 10; emphasis added).
•	 Consider the following ideas in your
preparation:
1. Plan and set aside personal time to
listen to and study the conference
addresses. This may require that you
remove yourself from distractions or
interruptions. Make the environment in
which you view, listen to, or study the
conference addresses acceptable to the
Holy Ghost. 
2. Pray in faith that you will receive
messages of significance in your own
life. Pray for the Church leaders as they
prepare and deliver their addresses.
3. Before listening to or studying the
conference addresses, list personal
questions or concerns for which
you are seeking answers. By taking
a spiritual inventory you may notice
aspects of your life where you want
to improve. In a journal or notebook,
record the answers and impressions
you receive during the conference.
4. After listening to or studying the
conference addresses, recommit to
improve your life in those areas that
impressed you.
•	 President Gordon B. Hinckley extended
the following invitation
at the beginning of a
general conference:
“You have gathered
to be encouraged, to be
inspired, to be lifted and directed as
members of the Church. . . .
“You have gathered to be helped with
your temporal concerns, your failures, and
your victories. You have come to hear the
word of the Lord taught by those who, not
of their own choosing, have been called as
teachers in this great work.
“You have prayed that you might
hear things that will help you with your
problems and add strength to your
faith. . . .
“I invite you to listen, listen if you will
by the power of the Spirit, to the speakers
who will address you today and tomorrow
as well as this evening. If you will do so,
I do not hesitate to promise that you will
be uplifted, your resolution to do what
is right will be stronger,
you will find solutions to
your problems and your
needs, and you will be
led to thank the Lord for
what you have heard”
(in Conference Report,
Oct. 1996, 3–4; or Ensign,
Nov. 1996, 4–5).
• President Spencer W.
Kimball (1895–1985)
encouraged us to write
down, remember, and
act on the thoughts we
receive as we listen to the messages given
during general conference:
“We hope that the leaders and the
members of the Church who have
attended and listened to the conference
have been inspired and uplifted. We hope
you have made copious notes of the
thoughts that have come to your mind
as the Brethren have addressed you. Many
suggestions have been given that will help
you as leaders in the perfection of your
work. Many helpful thoughts have been
given for the perfection of our own lives,
and that, of course, is the basic reason for
our coming.
“While sitting here, I have made up
my mind that when I go home from this
conference this night there are many,
many areas in my life that I can perfect.
I have made a mental list of them, and I
expect to go to work as soon as we get
through with conference” (in Conference
Report, Oct. 1975, 164; or Ensign, Nov.
1975, 111; emphasis added).
General Conference Is a Call to Action
•	 During a general conference in 1856,
President Brigham Young called on the
Saints to go and rescue stranded handcart
companies. Using this as an analogy, Elder
Jeffrey R. Holland of the Quorum of the
Twelve Apostles taught that the spiritual
renewal we gain from conference should
engage us in service to others:
“Each of these conferences marks a
call to action not only in our own lives
but also on behalf of others around us,
those who are of our own family and faith
and those who are not. . . .
“As surely as the rescue of those in
need [the stranded handcart companies
coming west] was the general conference
theme of October 1856, so too is it
the theme of this conference and last
conference and the one to come next
spring. It may not be blizzards and
frozen-earth burials that we face this
conference, but the needy are still out
there—the poor and the weary, the
discouraged and downhearted, those
‘[falling] away into [the] forbidden paths’
[1 Nephi 8:28] we mentioned earlier, and
multitudes who are ‘kept from the truth
because they know not where to find it’
[D&C 123:12]. They are all out there with
feeble knees, hands that hang down [see
D&C 81:5], and bad weather setting in.
They can be rescued only by those who
have more and know more and can help
more. And don’t worry about asking,
‘Where are they?’ They are everywhere,
on our right hand and on our left, in our
neighborhoods and in the workplace, in
every community and county and nation
of this world. Take your team and wagon;
load it with your love, your testimony, and
a spiritual sack of flour; then drive in any
direction. The Lord will lead you to those
in need if you will but embrace the gospel
of Jesus Christ that has been taught in this
conference. Open your heart and your
hand to those trapped in the 21st century’s
equivalent of Martin’s Cove and Devil’s
Gate. In doing so we honor the Master’s
repeated plea on behalf of lost sheep and
lost coins and lost souls [see Luke 15]” 
(in Conference Report, Oct. 2006, 112; or
Ensign, Nov. 2006, 106; emphasis added).
Applying the Teachings of General
Conference Will Improve Our Lives
•	 President Spencer W. Kimball taught
the following about the importance
of applying what we learn in general
conference:
“Sunday night, April 7, the great
Tabernacle was closed, the lights turned
out, the record[ing] machines stopped,
the doors locked, and another historic conference became history. It will have
been lost motion—a waste of time,
energy, and money—if its messages are
not heeded. In the [several] two-hour
sessions . . . , truths were taught, doctrines
expounded, exhortations given, enough
to save the whole world from all its
ills—and I mean from ALL its ills. A rather
complete education in eternal verities
was given to millions with a great hope
that there were ‘ears a’hearing and eyes
a’seeing and hearts a’throbing,’ convinced
of truth. . . .
“Let no arrogant, self-assured,
self-styled intellectual discard the truths
there taught and the testimonies there
borne, nor argue with the messages and
instructions there given. . . .
“I hope you young people all heard
the messages of the ages delivered
[during general conference]. There will
be other conferences every six months.
I hope you will get your copy of the
[Ensign or Liahona] and underline the
pertinent thoughts and keep it with you
for continual reference. No text or volume
outside the standard works of the Church
should have such a prominent place on
your personal library shelves—not for
their rhetorical excellence or eloquence
of delivery, but for the concepts which
point the way to eternal life” 
•	 President Ezra Taft Benson (1899–1994)
described how we could benefit more
from general conference:
“My humble prayer is that all of us
will follow the counsel and instruction we
have received.
“As we have felt the Spirit and made
new and sacred resolves, may we now
have the courage and fortitude to carry
out those resolves.
“For the next six months, your
conference edition of the Ensign should
stand next to your standard works and
be referred to frequently. As my dear
friend and brother [President] Harold B.
Lee said, we should let these conference
addresses ‘be the guide to [our] walk and
talk during the next six months. These
are the important matters the Lord sees
fit to reveal to this people in this day’ (in
Conference Report, Apr. 1946, p. 68).
“May we all go to our homes
rededicated to the sacred mission of the
Church as so beautifully set forth in these
conference sessions—to ‘invite all to come
unto Christ’ (D&C 20:59), ‘yea, come unto
Christ, and be perfected in him’ (Moroni
10:32)” (in Conference Report, Apr.
1988, 97; or Ensign, May 1988, 84).
•	 President Gordon B. Hinckley expressed
a desire that each Church member would
become a better person by applying the
teachings given at general conference:
“I hope that we shall ponder with
subdued feelings the talks to which we
have listened. I hope that we will quietly
reflect on the wonderful things we have
heard. I hope that we will feel a little more
contrite and humble.
“All of us have been edified. The test
will come in the application of the
teachings given. If, hereafter, we are a
little more kind, if we are a little more
neighborly, if we have drawn nearer to
the Savior, with a more firm resolution
to follow His teachings and His example,
then this conference will have been a wonderful success. If, on the other hand,
there is no improvement in our lives, then
those who have spoken will have in large
measure failed.
“Those changes may not be measurable
in a day or a week or a month. Resolutions
are quickly made and quickly forgotten.
But, in a year from now, if we are doing
better than we have done in the past, then
the efforts of these days will not have been
in vain.
“We will not remember all that has
been said, but there will arise from
all of this a spiritual uplift. It may be
undefinable, but it will be real. As the Lord
said to Nicodemus, ‘The wind bloweth
where it listeth, and thou hearest the
sound thereof, but canst not tell whence it
cometh, and whither it goeth: so is every
one that is born of the Spirit’ (John 3:8).
“So it will be with the experience we
have enjoyed. And perhaps out of all we
have heard, there may be a phrase or a
paragraph that will stand out and possess
our attention. If this occurs, I hope we
will write it down and
reflect on it until
we savor the depth
of its meaning and
have made it a part of
our own lives.
“In our family
home evenings
I hope we will
discuss with our
children these
things and let them taste the sweetness of
the truths we have enjoyed. And when the
Ensign magazine comes out . . . with all
of the conference messages, please don’t
just throw it aside with the comment that
you have heard it all, but read and ponder
the various messages. You will find many
things that you missed when you listened
to the speakers. . . .
“Tomorrow morning we will be back
at our jobs, back to our studies, back to
whatever constitutes the busy regimen of
our lives. But we can have the memories
of this great occasion to sustain us”.

•	 Elder PaulV. Johnson of the Seventy
explained that we need to put into action
the messages of general conference:
“In order for the messages of general
conference to change our lives, we need
to be willing to follow the counsel we
hear. The Lord explained in a revelation to
the Prophet Joseph Smith ‘that when ye
are assembled together ye shall instruct
and edify each other, that ye may know
. . . how to act upon the points of my law
and commandments’ [D&C 43:8]. But
knowing ‘how to act’ isn’t enough. The
Lord in the next verse said, ‘Ye shall bind
yourselves to act in all holiness before
me’ [D&C 43:9]. This willingness to take
action on what we have learned opens the
doors for marvelous blessings. . . .
“Every time we are obedient to the
words of the prophets and apostles
we reap great blessings. We receive
more blessings than we can understand
at the time, and we continue to receive
blessings long after our initial decision
to be obedient” (in Conference Report,
Oct. 2005, 54; or Ensign, Nov. 2005, 52;
emphasis added).
•	 At the closing of the April 1978 general
conference, President Spencer W. Kimball
said: “Now as we conclude this general
conference, let us all give heed to what
was said to us. Let us assume the counsel
given applies to us, to me. Let us hearken
to those we sustain as prophets and
seers, as well as the other brethren, as
if our eternal life depended upon it,
because it does!” (in Conference Report,
Apr. 1978, 117; or Ensign, May 1978, 77;
emphasis added).
•	 President Marion G. Romney (1897–1988)
of the First Presidency emphasized how
much truth is taught during general
conferences: “We have heard enough
truth and direction in this conference to
bring us into the presence of God if we
would follow it. We have been taken on to
the spiritual mountain and shown visions
of great glory” (in Conference Report, Apr.
1954, 132–33).
•	 As you commit to apply the teachings of
general conference in your life, consider
the following suggestions:
1. Discuss general conference with
family and friends. Share what you
learned, and learn from what they tell
you as well.
2. While you are listening to general
conference, when you feel the
promptings of the Spirit to do
something, write it down, and then
do it.
3. Set goals that specify how and when
you will apply the counsel you receive
during general conference. Write down
your goals and refer to them often.
4. Study the talks when they come out in
the Church magazines or on the
Internet so you can gain new insights
and renew the spiritual feelings you
had. (General conference talks are
available to read or listen to on LDS.org;
word and topic searches may also be
done within the Ensign magazines
online.)
5. Prepare family home evening lessons
around conference talks.

6. Purchase the DVDs or CDs of general
conference, and watch or listen
to them often, possibly while you
commute or travel to help you use your
time more wisely.
7. Copy brief quotations from
conference talks and place them
somewhere in your home or apartment
where you will see them regularly. Try
to memorize them


Chapter 7 - Studying
General
Conference
Addresses

 Introduction
 President ezra taft Benson (1899–1994)
taught a principle that is fundamental to this
course: “the living prophet has the power
of	TNT.	By	that	I	mean	‘Today’s	News	Today.’	
 . . . therefore, the most important reading
we can do is any of the words of the prophet
 . . . contained each month in our Church
magazines.	Our	marching	orders	for	each	six	
months are found in the general conference
addresses, which are printed in the Ensign	[or	
 Liahona	]	magazine”	(“Fourteen	Fundamentals	
in Following the Prophet,” in 1980 Devotional
Speeches of the Year 	[1981],		27).
 President Spencer W. Kimball (1895–1985)
also encouraged Church members to obtain
a copy of the conference issue of the Church
magazines and to make it a part of their
gospel	library:	“I	hope	you	will	get	your	copy	
of	the	[	 Ensign or Liahona ]	and	underline	the	
pertinent thoughts and keep it with you for
continual	reference.	No	text	or	volume	outside	
the standard works of the Church should have
such a prominent place on your personal library
shelves—not	for	their	rhetorical	excellence	or	
eloquence of delivery, but for the
concepts which point the way to
eternal life” ( In the World but Not
of It, Brigham Young university
Speeches	of	the	Year	[May		14,	1968],	
2–3).
 this chapter provides ideas and
skills to help you study the general
conference issues of the Ensign
or Liahona and other talks and
writings of the General authorities
more effectively. Most of this
course is dedicated to studying
and learning from the most recent
general conference addresses.
as you thoughtfully listen to and
study addresses by living prophets,
you can learn the will of the lord
for you at this time. Prayerfully
determine how you can use these
skills to increase your faith in
the lord Jesus Christ and in the
messages He inspires His appointed
leaders to give us.
 Commentary
 Prepare Your Mind and Your Heart
 Preparation is essential in receiving and
understanding the will of the Lord. The
Lord has promised, “I will tell you in your
mind and in your heart, by the Holy Ghost,
which shall come upon you and which shall
dwell in your heart” ( D&C 8:2 ). The word
of the Lord will come to you more readily
as you prepare your mind and your heart.
Elder David A. Bednar of the Quorum of the
Twelve Apostles taught the importance of
preparing and being an active learner:
 “Nephi teaches us, ‘When a man
speaketh by the power of the Holy Ghost the
power of the Holy Ghost carrieth [the
message] unto the hearts of the
children of men’ ( 2 Nephi 33:10 ).
Please notice how the power of
the Spirit carries the message unto
but not necessarily into the heart.
A teacher can explain,
demonstrate, persuade, and
testify, and do so with great
spiritual power and effectiveness.
Ultimately, however, the content
of a message and the witness of
the Holy Ghost penetrate into the
heart only if a receiver allows
them to enter.
 “Brothers and sisters, learning
by faith opens the pathway into
the heart. . . .
 “A learner exercising
agency by acting in accordance 
with correct principles opens his or her
heart to the Holy Ghost—and invites
His teaching, testifying power, and
confirming witness. Learning by faith
requires spiritual, mental, and physical
exertion and not just passive reception. It
is in the sincerity and consistency of our
faith-inspired action that we indicate to
our Heavenly Father and His Son, Jesus
Christ, our willingness to learn and receive
instruction from the Holy Ghost. . . .
“. . . Experience has enabled me to
understand that an answer given by
another person usually is not remembered
for very long, if remembered at all. But an
answer we discover or obtain through the
exercise of faith, typically, is retained for
a lifetime. The most important learnings
of life are caught—not taught” (“Seek
Learning by Faith” [address to CES
religious educators, Feb. 3, 2006], 1, 3, 5).
Consider the following ways to prepare
yourself before a general conference:
• Set aside time to listen to the conference
addresses without distractions. Create an
environment in which you can receive
promptings from the Holy Ghost.
•	 Seek the guidance of the Spirit through
thoughtful prayer, fasting, and scripture
study.
•	 List personal questions or concerns for
which you are seeking answers. Then
record the answers and impressions that
you receive during the conference.
•	 Review your notes from the previous
general conference.
Practice Good Study Skills When
Studying General Conference
Addresses
When you study general conference
addresses, you can use many of the same
skills you use when studying the scriptures.
The rest of this chapter describes some
of those skills. Implementing the study
suggestions in this chapter will not only
influence your study of the living prophets,
it will influence your power to make correct
choices.
Identify Doctrines and Principles
As you study the general conference
addresses, look for clear statements
of gospel doctrines and principles.
Identify and mark them in a way that
allows you to review and remember them.
Reviewing and pondering statements of
the doctrines and principles can strengthen
your understanding of gospel truths and
your commitment to live by them. The
following are a few examples of doctrines
and principles taught during general
conferences:
•	 Elder Richard G. Scott of the Quorum
of the Twelve Apostles: “Seldom will
you receive a complete response [to a
prayer] all at once. It will come a piece at
a time, in packets, so that you will grow
in capacity. As each piece is followed in faith, you will be led to other portions
until you have the whole answer. That
pattern requires you to exercise faith
in our Father’s capacity to respond.
While sometimes it’s very hard, it results
in significant personal growth” (in
Conference Report, Apr. 2007, 6; or Ensign,
May 2007, 9).
•	 President Henry B. Eyring of the First
Presidency: “We know from prophecy
that not only will the true and living
Church not be taken from the earth
again, but it will become better. . . . The
scriptures contain promises that when
the Lord comes again to His Church,
He will find it spiritually prepared
for Him. That should make us both
determined and optimistic. We must
do better. We can. And we will” (in
Conference Report, Apr. 2008, 20; or
Ensign, May 2008, 21).
•	 Elder Robert D. Hales of the Quorum
of the Twelve Apostles: “We prepare
to receive personal revelation as the
prophets do, by studying the scriptures,
fasting, praying, and building faith. Faith
is the key” (in Conference Report, Oct.
2007, 94; or Ensign, Nov. 2007, 88).
Identify Scriptural Interpretations or
Clarifications
Prophets play a key role in interpreting and
clarifying scripture. The following are some
examples:
•	 Elder Jeffrey R. Holland of the Quorum
of the Twelve Apostles taught how the
scriptures show the separate nature of
the three members of the Godhead (see
Conference Report, Oct. 2007, 40–43; or
Ensign, Nov. 2007, 40–42).
•	 President James E. Faust (1920–2007)
of the First Presidency discussed the
application of several scriptures as he
taught about the principle of forgiving
others (see Conference Report, Apr. 2007,
65–68; or Ensign, May 2007, 67–69).
•	 Elder David A. Bednar of the Quorum
of the Twelve Apostles spoke on “the
tender mercies of the Lord,” mentioned in
1 Nephi 1:20 (see Conference Report, Apr.
2005, 104–8; or Ensign, May 2005, 99–102).
Make Cross-References between the Talks
and the Scriptures
As you identify scriptural interpretations or
clarifications, it can be helpful to write the
reference of the conference address in the
margin next to the scripture that is taught
or clarified. Following are some examples:
•	 Next to Revelation 22:18 you could
write the citation: Elder Jeffrey R. Holland,
Ensign, May 2008, 91–94. In this talk, Elder
Holland referred to Revelation 22:18 and
discussed the importance of continuing
revelation.
•	 Next to Psalm 24:3–4 you could write:
Elder David A. Bednar, Ensign, Nov. 2007,
80–83. Elder Bednar discussed what it
means to have clean hands and a pure
heart.
•	 Next to Nehemiah 6 you could write:
President Dieter F. Uchtdorf, Ensign,
May 2009, 59–62. President Uchtdorf
discussed Nehemiah rebuilding the walls
surrounding Jerusalem and the idea that
“we are doing a great work and cannot
come down.” 
You could also use the space in the margins
in your copy of the Ensign or Liahona to
write scripture references that support the
ideas taught in the talk.
Identify Encouragements, Invitations, or
Commandments
As you look for encouragements,
invitations, and commandments, you will
learn specific things you should do to be
in harmony with the Lord’s will. It may
be helpful to underline these statements
in your copy of the Ensign or Liahona to
help you find them later. The following are
examples of such statements:
•	Elder L.Tom Perry of the Quorum of
the Twelve Apostles: “We issue the call
again for all spiritually, physically, and
emotionally qualified young men to come
forth prepared to become missionaries in
the Church of Jesus Christ. Be certain that
you easily clear the minimum standards
for service as a missionary and that you
are continually raising the bar. Prepare
yourself to be more effective in this great
calling” (in Conference Report, Oct. 2007,
51–52; or Ensign, Nov. 2007, 49).
•	 Elder Dallin H. Oaks of the Quorum of
the Twelve Apostles:
“As we consider various choices, we
should remember that it is not enough
that something is good. Other choices are
better, and still others are best. . . .
“Consider how we use our time in the
choices we make in viewing television,
playing video games, surfing the Internet,
or reading books or magazines. Of course it
is good to view wholesome entertainment
or to obtain interesting information. But
not everything of that sort is worth that
portion of our life we give to obtain it.
Some things are better, and others are
best” (in Conference Report, Oct.
2007, 111; or Ensign, Nov. 2007, 104–5).
•	 President Thomas S. Monson: “To you
who are able to attend the temple, I would
counsel you to go often” (in Conference
Report, Apr. 2008, 113; or Ensign, May
2008, 112).
Look for Promised Blessings and What We
Must Do to Claim Them
The prophets often make promises to
those who follow the principles they
teach. Seeking promised blessings can help
inspire us to live righteously. The following
are two examples of such promises:
•	 President Henry B. Eyring of the First
Presidency: “If you ponder the scriptures
and begin to do what you covenanted
with God to do, I can promise you that
you will feel more love for God and more
of His love for you. And with that, your
prayers will come from the heart, full of
thanks and of pleading. You will feel a
greater dependence on God. You will find
the courage and the determination to act
in His service, without fear and with peace
in your heart. You will pray always. And
you will not forget Him, no matter what
the future brings”.
•	 Elder L.Tom Perry of the Quorum of
the Twelve Apostles: “I promise great
blessings—social, physical, mental,
emotional, and spiritual blessings—to
every young man who pays for a
significant part of his mission” (in
Conference Report, Oct. 2007, 51; or
Ensign, Nov. 2007, 49).
Identify Repeated Words and Phrases
Repeated words and phrases can draw
attention to the central message of the
speaker. For example, President Dieter F.
Uchtdorf of the First Presidency repeatedly
used the phrase “a few degrees” throughout
one conference address to emphasize that
“the difference between happiness and
misery in individuals, in marriages, and
families often comes down to an error of
only a few degrees” (see Conference Report,
Apr. 2008, 57–61; or Ensign, May 2008, 57–
60). President Uchtdorf similarly repeated
the phrase “faith of our fathers” in an
address later that same general conference
as he counseled us to remember the faith
of those who prepared the way before us
(see Conference Report, Apr. 2008, 69–73; or
Ensign, May 2008, 68–70, 75).
Repeated words and phrases can also
link together the messages of more than
one speaker. For example, you may notice
phrases such as “tender mercies” and
“raising the bar” being used in several
addresses in the same general conference or
in more than one conference. Connecting
the teachings from multiple addresses can
give you a broader understanding of the
important gospel principles they teach.
Make Note of Memorable Phrases
Look for phrases and
sentences that, though short
and easy to remember, carry
a depth of meaning. When
pondered, they can enlarge
your understanding of
important principles. The
following are some examples:
President Thomas S.
Monson
•	 Elder Joseph B.Wirthlin (1917–2008) of the
Quorum of the Twelve Apostles: “When
we love the Lord, obedience ceases to be
a burden” (in Conference Report, Oct.
2007, 30; or Ensign, Nov. 2007, 30).
•	 President Thomas S. Monson: “There is
no friendship more valuable than your
own clear conscience” (in Conference
Report, Apr. 2008, 66; or Ensign, May
2008, 65).
Identify Lists
Speakers may use lists to describe a process,
such as repentance, or parts of a principle.
For example, President Thomas S. Monson
listed “marks of a true holder of the
priesthood of God.” His
list included “the mark
of vision,” “the mark
of effort,” “the mark
of faith,” “the mark of
virtue,” and “the mark of
prayer” (see Conference
Report, Oct. 2007, 63–66;
or Ensign, Nov. 2007,
59–61). Identifying lists
as you study conference
addresses can help you
outline and organize the
information in them. This
will help you understand
and remember the
teachings and apply
them in your life.
Look for Cause-and-Effect
and “If-Then” Statements
Look for statements
that clarify the effects
of specific actions. They
identify consequences
and blessings. The following are some
examples:
•	 President Henry B. Eyring of the First
Presidency: “If we become casual in our
study of the scriptures, we will become
casual in our prayers. We may not cease
to pray, but our prayers will become more repetitive, more mechanical, lacking
real intent” (in Conference Report, Oct.
2001, 18; or Ensign, Nov. 2001, 17).
•	 President Gordon B. Hinckley (1910–
2008): “If you will do this [control your
temper], your lives will be without regret.
Your marriages and family relationships
will be preserved. You will be much
happier. You will do greater good. You
will feel a sense of peace that will be
wonderful” (in Conference Report, Oct.
2007, 68; or Ensign, Nov. 2007, 66).
•	 President Thomas S. Monson: “If we are
on the Lord’s errand, . . . we are entitled
to the Lord’s help” (in Conference Report,
Apr. 2008, 65; or Ensign, May 2008, 65).
Pay Attention to Words and Phrases That
Introduce a Specific Point or Conclusion
Words such as “therefore,” “finally,”
“remember,” and “thus” and phrases such
as “in conclusion” and “in summary”
introduce main points or conclusions. The
following are some examples:
•	 Elder Russell M. Nelson of the Quorum
of the Twelve Apostles quoted Ephesians
2:19–20 and 4:11–13 and then said,
“Thus the ministry of the Apostles—the
First Presidency and the Twelve—is to
bring about that unity of the faith and to
proclaim our knowledge of the Master” (in
Conference Report, Apr. 2008, 5; or Ensign,
May 2008, 7).
•	 Elder L.Tom Perry of the Quorum of the
Twelve Apostles emphasized the unity
that should exist in marriage when he
concluded speaking about the father
being the head of the family: “Remember,
brethren, that in your role as leader in the
family, your wife is your companion. . . .
Since the beginning, God has instructed
mankind that marriage should unite
husband and wife together in unity.
Therefore, there is not a president or a vice
president in a family. The couple works
together eternally for the good of the
family. They are united together in word, in
deed, and in action as they lead, guide, and
direct their family unit. They are on equal
footing. They plan and organize the affairs
of the family jointly and unanimously as
they move forward” (in Conference Report,
Apr. 2004, 72; or Ensign, May 2004, 71).
Ask Questions
Asking good questions promotes learning
and allows the Holy Ghost to teach you
beyond the spoken word. As you study
conference addresses, learn to ask questions
such as the following:
•	Why did the speaker use this word or this
phrase?
•	What is the message for me, for my family,
or for the Church
•	 How can I apply this in my life?
•	What does this teach me about Jesus
Christ or the plan of salvation?
•	 Is there a major theme in this conference?
Write Down Spiritual Promptings
As you ponder the counsel given in general
conference, you can receive insights and
promptings from the Holy Ghost tailored
to your needs and your level of spiritual
maturity. Writing down insights in a journal
or notebook can help to cement them into
your mind and heart. You may also want
to write down some goals for personal
improvement. Periodically review your notes
and goals and evaluate your progress.
•	 Elder Richard G. Scott explained an added
blessing of recording our thoughts: “It is
through the repeated process of feeling
impressions, recording them, and obeying
them that one learns to depend on the
direction of the Spirit more than on
communication through the five senses”
(“Helping Others to Be Spiritually Led”
[address to CES religious educators,
Aug. 11, 1998], 3).
•	 President Gordon B. Hinckley also
encouraged us to do this: “Perhaps out of
all we have heard, there may be a phrase
or a paragraph that will stand out and
possess our attention. If this occurs, I
hope we will write it down and reflect on
it until we savor the depth of its meaning
and have made it a part of our own lives”
(in Conference Report, Oct. 2000, 114; or
Ensign, Nov. 2000, 88).
Look for the Testimonies of the Lord’s Special
Witnesses
Powerful, faith-building testimonies are
great sources of strength to our own
testimonies. Seldom is the Spirit so strong
as when testimonies are shared. Following
are two examples of this:
•	 President Gordon B. Hinckley bore this
testimony of the Savior: “Be strong in
your testimony of Jesus Christ, the Son
of God. He is the chief cornerstone of
this great work. Of His divinity and
reality I bear solemn witness. He is the
Lamb without blemish, who was offered
for the sins of the world. Through His
pain and because of His suffering I find
reconciliation and eternal life. He is my
Teacher, my Exemplar, my Friend, and my
Savior whom I love and worship as the
Redeemer of the world” (in Conference
Report, Oct. 1992, 75; or Ensign, Nov.
1992, 52).
•	 In his final general conference address
before his death, Elder Bruce R. McConkie
(1915–85) of the Quorum
of the Twelve Apostles
testified:
“And now, as pertaining
to this perfect atonement,
wrought by the shedding
of the blood of God—I
testify that it took place in Gethsemane
and at Golgotha, and as pertaining to
Jesus Christ, I testify that he is the Son
of the Living God and was crucified for
the sins of the world. He is our Lord, our
God, and our King. This I know of myself
independent of any other person.
“I am one of his witnesses, and in a
coming day I shall feel the nail marks in
his hands and in his feet and shall wet his
feet with my tears.
“But I shall not know any better then
than I know now that he is God’s Almighty
Son, that he is our Savior and Redeemer,
and that salvation comes in and through
his atoning blood and in no other way.
“God grant that all of us may walk in
the light as God our Father is in the light
so that, according to the promises, the
blood of Jesus Christ his Son will cleanse
us from all sin” (in Conference Report,
Apr. 1985, 12; or Ensign, May 1985, 11).
Memorize Meaningful Statements
The Lord said that what His servants say
“when moved upon by the Holy Ghost
shall be scripture” (D&C 68:4). In this
light, counsel that Elder Richard G. Scott
of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles gave
for accurately quoting and memorizing
scriptures might also be applied to the
words of the living prophets:
•	 “There is a power that can change lives
in the specific words recorded in the
standard works. That power is weakened
when we paraphrase or alter the actual
wording. I therefore suggest that you
encourage students to cite scripture
content with precision. All you do to
encourage students to memorize selected
scriptures accurately will bring to bear
in their lives the power of their content”
(“Four Fundamentals for Those Who
Teach and Inspire Youth,” in Old Testament
Symposium Speeches, 1987 [1988], 5).
•	 “I suggest that you memorize scriptures
that touch your heart and fill your soul
with understanding. When scriptures are
used as the Lord has caused them to be
recorded, they have intrinsic power that
is not communicated when paraphrased.
Sometimes when there is a significant
need in my life, I review mentally
scriptures that have given me strength.
There is great solace, direction, and
power that flow from the scriptures,
especially the words of the Lord” (in
Conference Report, Oct. 1999, 112; or
Ensign, Nov. 1999, 87–88).
Memorizing meaningful statements
from messages of the living prophets will
provide us with a reserve of inspiration and
guidance we can call on when we need it.
Study Talks Given on the Same Topic
Studying more than one talk given on the
same topic will often highlight areas of
emphasis and provide additional insights.
For example, in the October 2007 general
conference Elder Robert D. Hales of the
Quorum of the Twelve Apostles spoke on
personal revelation, and Elder Richard G.
Scott, also of the Quorum of the Twelve,
spoke about using revelation to guide our
choices (see “Personal Revelation: The
Teachings and Examples of the Prophets”
and “Truth: The Foundation of Correct
Decisions,” Ensign, Nov. 2007, 86–92). In
the April 2006 general conference Elders
M. Russell Ballard and Richard G. Scott of
the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles spoke
on sharing the gospel. Elder Ballard spoke
on inviting friends and neighbors into our
homes as a way to share the gospel with
them, and after that address Elder Scott
discussed the preparation of missionaries in
the home and in the Church.

Make a Library of Your Notes and the Ensign
or Liahona Conference Issues
Keep the conference issues of the Church
magazines, along with the notes you took
while listening to or studying the addresses,
so you can refer back to them later. This will
enable you to compare those past messages
and thoughts with those received later. You
will also be able to see how certain principles
and doctrines are repeated in many
conferences and begin to cross-reference
them. And it will improve your ability to
draw upon the words of the prophets during
teaching opportunities, such as on a mission,
in a sacrament meeting talk, in Church
classes, or in family home evening.
Apply What You Learn
The goal of your gospel study should be to
live the gospel better. It is not just what you
know but what you do with what you know
that brings the greatest happiness in your
life. We are to be “doers of the word, and
not hearers only” (James 1:22). As you apply
what you learn, you will develop greater
understanding of the plan of salvation and
a stronger desire to share it with others.
Happiness is assured when we accept and
live according to the counsel of the Lord and
His prophets.
Contemplating the following questions as
you study general conference can help you
apply what you learn:
•	 How would the Lord have me apply this
in my life?
•	 How can I use this to strengthen my faith?
•	When have I experienced something like
what is being taught?
•	What difference would it make in my life
to follow this teaching?
•	 How can I use this to teach others about
a gospel principle?