1.1 Oh, Say What Is Truth 1. 1 O h, S a y W h a t I s T r u t h
The Nature of Reasoned, Discovered, and Revealed Truth
Dr. Dan Moore and Dr. Brian Tonks, Geology and Physics Departments, BYU-Idaho

The greatest obstacle to discovery is not ignorance … it is the illusion of knowledge. —Daniel
Boors n

Learning Objectives:
● Understand and be able to identify each of the following: absolute truth, perfect knowledge,
preparatory knowledge, reasoned knowledge and truth, revealed knowledge and truth, discovered
knowledge and truth, God’s Words, God’s Works, observation, interpretation, fundamentalism, and
dogmaism.
● Understand the strengths, weakness, similari es and diﬀerences of reasoned, discovered, and
revealed truths.
● Understand what a Scholarly Disciple (Disciple Scholar) is and how to use the ‘zone of truth’
approach to address apparent conﬂicts between discovered and revealed truth.

Not long before his death, Jesus declared, “…for this cause came I into the world, that I should
bear witness of the truth. Every one that is of the truth heareth my voice.” Pilate rebuﬀed
Jesus’ declaration by asking, “What is truth?” (John 18). At another me, Jesus taught that
freedom stems from knowing truth (John 8). In a world of confusion, uncertainty, and deceit,
the ques on “What is truth?” and the associated ques ons “How can I ﬁnd truth?” and “What
sources can I trust for truth?” are fundamentally important. Your happiness and des ny hinge
upon ﬁnding and using correct answers to these ques ons.
So, what is truth? Jesus provided this broadly ﬁrm deﬁnition: ‘... truth is knowledge of things as
they are, as they were, and as they are to come’ (Doctrine and Covenants, D&C, 93). In other
words, truth is knowledge of objective reality, of the way things really are. We refer to this
objective reality as absolute truth. From this perspective, those who seek truth about the
natural world seek to understand the actual processes and events that produced the physical
Universe and all it contains—including our bodies and the Earth, stars, and galaxies.
Unfortunately, perfect knowledge of absolute truth is beyond our current reach—because we
cannot claim to know even one thing perfectly unless we understand its relationships to all
other things perfectly, which of course requires also knowing those things perfectly. Thus, all
present human understanding must be considered preparatory knowledge—understanding
that can contain abundant truth but can only approximate absolute truth. This does not mean
that we cannot ﬁnd truth in this life—for we have ready access preparatory knowledge, and this
understanding can closely match it’s absolutely-true counterpart.

2

The idea of preparatory knowledge—of contiunously upgrading our present understanding with
successively-more-true knowledge—drives some people crazy. These individuals want
immediate, simple, rigid answers that never evolve. Unfortunately for them, learning truth just
doesn't work this way. Instead, human knowledge of absolute truth accumulates 'line upon line,
precept upon precept, here a li le and there a li le un l that perfect day’. In that day, we will
have perfect knowledge. Un l then, we must treat the truth we have with tremendous
gra tude and commitment, correctly identify the appropriate degree of conﬁdence to place in
present preparatory knowledge, and search earnestly for improved understanding with pa ent
ﬂexibility.
To be sure, present limitations of human understanding need not keep us from being conﬁdent
in what we know—but even extreme certainty is not the same as perfect knowledge. The
important point, from our perspective, is to set perfect knowledge of absolute truth as our goal
—and then to move towards that goal with the strenuous meekness that characterizes those
who are deeply commi ed to present understanding and who anxiously await the future
reﬁnements that arrive with each new revelation and discovery.
Such an approach to preparatory knowledge and absolute truth is strengthened by carefully
dis nguishing between diﬀerent types of truth—for example, between reasoned, discovered,
and revealed truths; between truths from God’s Words and from God’s Works; and between
observed and interpreted truths.

Reasoned, Discovered, and Revealed Knowledge

Sledge hammers are excellent tools for removing brick walls but horrid implements for shaping
delicate gemstones. Likewise, the strengths and weaknesses of reasoned, discovered, and
revealed truths make each the right tool for some inquiries and the wrong tool for others. Your
ability to seek for, use, and defend truth is founded in your capacity to correctly understand and
use each type of truth.
Reasoned knowledge and truths consist of rational ideas for which the conclusions follow
logically from the premises. These truths form the foundation of most rule-based systems of
knowledge such as mathema cs, language, rhetoric, and law. When someone says a reasoned
truth “is true!”, they mean it is logical or follows the rules that produced it. Unfortunately,
reasoned truth is limited because it cannot demonstrate the truthfulness of its premises. As
such, reasoned ‘truths’ can include false conclusions—making logic a necessary but insuﬃcient
test for truth. Thankfully, discovery and revelation eliminate this limitation by employing logic
and additional, stronger tests for truth. In this way, discovered and revealed truths are
enhanced forms of reasoned truths that can be trusted with greater conﬁdence.
Discovered knowledge and truths consist of descrip ons and explanations of nature that
match reality—that correspond to the physical world 'as it actually is'. To say a discovered truth
“is true!” means that it validly describes or explains nature. Humanity discovers these truths as

3
“is true!” means that it validly describes or explains nature. Humanity discovers these truths as
we recognize pa erns in nature, explain the responsible mechanisms, and then test those
explanations by seeing if they correspond to reality. This process of describing nature and then
tes ng explanations using the actual world makes discovery an excellent way to answer 'how'
(process) ques ons and an authorita ve source of truth about the nature and development of
the physical world. In contrast, discovered truths are poor ways to answer 'why' (purpose)
ques ons or gain spiritual knowledge (such as learning requirements for returning to God’s
presence).
Revealed knowledge and truths consist of ideas God reveals to humans. God could, of course,
choose to reveal any truth—but God primarily reveals truths to strengthen us and help us
understand our relationship to Him, His will and plan for us, and the principles of a happy and
productive life. God rarely reveals details about how the world works; instead, he inspires
humanity to discover these truths. The conﬁrmatory nature of receiving truth from God
ensures that these ideas come from God, not man—and makes revelation an authorita ve
source of truth. To say a revealed truth “is true!” means that God has conﬁrmed the idea to
your soul. According to wri en scripture, revealed truths—like reasoned and discovered truths
—also have a preparatory character, for they accumulate ‘line upon line’ ‘according to our
language and understanding’ (2 Ne 28:30; 31:3). This preparatory nature is powerfully
exempliﬁed by the meaning of ‘eternal punishment’. To most, ‘eternal punishment’ has meant
‘punishment without end’, but God clariﬁed that it instead means ‘God’s punishment’ and likely
is not ‘eternal’ in the ‘without end’ sense (Ma 23:33 & 2 Ne 9:16; D&C 19).
Revealed truths are excellent ways to answer ‘why' (purpose) ques ons and gain knowledge
about the spiritual world, but they are generally poor ways to discover ‘how’ things work. Said
diﬀerently, revelation can provide us with great certainty and conﬁdence about spiritual
ma ers, but it rarely teaches us about processes and mechanisms. For example, we can receive
a strong witness that the Atonement has power to cleanse and heal without understanding how
the cleansing or healing is accomplished. Figure 1.1 summarizes some basic a ributes of and
relationships between reasoned, discovered, and revealed truth.
Occasionally, discovered (scientific) truths and revealed (religious) truths appear to conﬂict.
These apparent conﬂicts are natural and unavoidable, indicate gaps in present understanding,
and will persist un l we know everything perfectly. The scriptural accounts of The Ongoing
Creation illustrate the strengths and limitations of revealed truth. These accounts clearly teach
God’s relationship to the natural world and to humanity. They also teach the purpose of Earthly
existence. However, these accounts do not teach how God accomplished these acts, and
wri en scripture indicates that God has more to reveal on the topic (e.g., D&C 88 and 101).
In contrast to these the authority associated with reasoned, discovered, and revealed
knowledge, o pinions need not pass any test for truth—that is, opinions need not be logical,
correspond to nature, or be conﬁrmed by God. For this reason, untested opinions carry no
authority, and mistaking opinion for truth is a common source of error and confusion. Thus, the
opinions of authori es may be interes ng, well-inten oned, and persuasive—but those
opinions carry no authority, because being an expert prac oner is not a valid test for truth.

4 opinions carry no authority, because being an expert prac oner is not a valid test for truth.
Truth can only be appropriately assessed using valid tests—logic for reasoned knowledge,
correspondence with nature for discovered knowledge, and conﬁrmation by God for revealed
knowledge. Full stop.

Figure 1.1 Illustration summarizing the basic characteris cs of reasoned, discovered and
revealed knowledge and truth. (Author illustration)
For these reasons, it is important to never confuse 'statements made by authori es' and
'authorita ve statements'. They are not the same thing. This does not mean that authority
ﬁgures should not share their opinions or that such asser ons have no u lity. To the contrary,
the opinions of authority ﬁgures—true or not—can be wonderful trailheads to truth and
provide deep insight ...but they should never be mistaken for 'authorita ve statements'.
Without doubt, our striving for perfect knowledge must include the appropriate use of all types
of truth—reasoned, discovered, and revealed. Misunderstanding or misapplying the types and
tests of truth always diminishes capacity and limits access to truth, and ignorance and inability
in these areas are the birthplace of dogmaism and fundamentalism.

God's Words and God's Works

In his ministry, Jesus urged those he taught to accept his works, even if they chose to reject His
words (John 10). Although Jesus was referring primarily to the miracles he performed, His
teaching applies equally well to His crea ve works. This perspective encourages those who
believe God created nature to accept both God's Words (wri en scripture) and God's Works
(the physical world and all it contains) as faithful records of The Ongoing Creation.
Many religious people ﬁnd the ﬁrst equation (God's Words = wri en scripture) obvious but fail
to view the physical world as natural scripture—as a faithful record of how God created nature.
Strangely, many religious people deeply mistrust nature (God’s creations) as a source of truth

5
Strangely, many religious people deeply mistrust nature (God’s creations) as a source of truth
about The Ongoing Creation. As such, these individuals do li le to fulﬁll God's command to
study His Works (the physical world) and ﬁnd Him in those works. Perhaps this is why the Lord
indicated that many religious people in our day would not be able to ﬁnd Him (God) in nature
(D&C 88). These scriptural teachings seem to acknowledge—and reject—the supposed 'conﬂict'
between science and religion, between discovered and revealed truth. We ﬁrmly witness that
God’s Words and Works are complementary and faithful witnesses of The Ongoing Creation.
So, what’s your perspective on God’s Works? Do you consider the study of nature as a godly
activity akin to 'reading your wri en scriptures'—or does that seem blasphemous to you? Have
you ever ‘seen God’ while observing a galaxy or an early-human fossil as God promised you
could? Have you ever considered that science, as the study of God’s works, presents unique and
powerful ways to come to know God? If these are new concepts, you're in good company: few
religious people think about nature or science in these ways. Instead, many consider that
science inherently opposes religion and weakens faith. Not so. The study of God's Works—
science—is a God-commanded, faith-building endeavor. It is not science—but scientific
fundamentalists—that oppose religion and seek to diminish faith.
Sadly, modern opponents of truth have largely succeeded in convincing individuals that science
and religion—humanity's two great, authorita ve sources of truth—cannot coexist, that you
must choose one or the other but can never choose both. Although fundamentalist arguments
can be persuasive, they are false. You need not commit to either God’s Words or God’s Works.
You can—even must—commit to both. What’s more, your decision will reveal much about your
commitment to truth.

Observation and Interpretation 

Imagine you throw a ball into the air above you. What happens? If you pay a en on, you’ll
no ce that the ball slows as it ascends, momentarily stops, and then falls toward you with
increasing speed. These descrip ons of the ball are observations. An observation is a
descrip on of something you experience using your sense of sight, hearing, touch, taste, or
smell. Observations made by an individual can be subjective, but observations can be objective
if they are reproduced many mes by diﬀerent people, from diﬀerent perspectives. These
scientific observations are experiences made with the senses (or with instruments that extend
the senses) that all rational humans experience objectively—regardless of their philosophical,
poli cal, or religious outlook.
Scientific observations describe nature, ‘as it is’. As such, they are a special class of discovered
truth in which humanity can place tremendous conﬁdence. Explanations of scientific
observations are called interpretations. Scientific interpretations explain how nature works and
how it came to be the way it is. Importantly, humanity cannot place the same level of
conﬁdence in interpretations that we can in observations. Although scientific observations are
essen ally indisputable, our conﬁdence that an interpretation is true varies with the type,
abundance, and quality of tests that ‘fail to falsify’ (i.e., support) the interpretation. For
example, our conﬁdence is low for unsupported or poorly supported interpretations, and our

6
example, our conﬁdence is low for unsupported or poorly supported interpretations, and our
conﬁdence is high for interpretations supported by abundant high-quality tests. Of course,
reasoned, discovered, and revealed asser ons of truth are tested in diﬀerent ways: logic is the
test for reasoned truths, correspondence with nature is the test for discovered truths, and
conﬁrmation by God is the test for revealed truths.
In the ball-throwing example, scientific observations describe the position, speed, and
acceleration of the ball. In contrast, scientific interpretations explain what causes the ball to
move. For example, gravity explains the ball’s mo on in terms of a gravitational force that
connects the ball and Earth and contiunously pulls the two together. As you likely know,
humanity falsiﬁed these forces in the early 1900s—that is, humanity demonstrated that
gravitational forces are not real more than a century ago. Today, general rela vity provides a
far-more-true interpretation of the ball’s mo on in terms of the curvature of space me. (More
on this later.)
Importantly, skilled seekers of truth consistently and clearly diﬀeren ate between observations
and interpretations. Those who fail to do so struggle to ﬁnd and defend truth and are almost
never able to reconcile discovered and revealed truth. Without the nuanced ability to use
observations and interpretations appropriately in their search for truth, these individuals
typically devolve into dogmaism and become scientific or religious fundamentalists. Notably,
much of the miscommunication that characterizes the supposed conﬂict between science and
religion—between discovered and revealed truth—results from problems associated with the
confounding of observation and interpretation. Said diﬀerently, confusing observations and
interpretations produces serious errors that obscure truth and blind well-inten oned
individuals. As such, we invite you to contiune developing and using your ability to clearly and
consistently dis nguish observations from interpretations.

Fundamentalism and Dogmaism

Since all present knowledge is preparatory, skilled truth seekers must carefully, consistently, and
accurately assess the degree of conﬁdence they place in each idea they encounter. Mis-
es ma ng the ‘truth content’ of knowledge blinds the mind, wastes eﬀort, retards progress,
and generates the complementary missteps known as fundamentalism and dogmaism.
Underes ma ng truth content is the main ﬂaw of fundamentalism, and overes ma ng degree
of truthfulness is the central error of dogmaism. In other words, fundamentalism is thinking
you have the 'whole truth', ‘most of the truth’, or ‘the important stuﬀ' when you do not—and
dogmaism is trea ng an idea as absolute, nearly-absolute, or as more-true-than-it-is. Said
diﬀerently, dogmaism involves not appropriately understanding the limitations of an asserted
truth or important relationships to related asser ons. The most egregious and damaging
dogmaism results from mistaking preparatory knowledge or high conﬁdence for absolute truth.
The extent of fundamentalism and dogmaism scales with the degree of over- or under-
es mation of truth.
Both dogmaism and fundamentalism block adherents of one type to truth (e.g., revelation)
from enjoying the blessings of the complementary path (e.g., discovery—and vice-versa).

7
from enjoying the blessings of the complementary path (e.g., discovery—and vice-versa).
Dogmaism blinds because correctly understanding what you don't know is an essen al
prerequisite to ﬁnding truth—for why waste eﬀort looking for what you already have (Alma
32)? Likewise, fundamentalism wastes eﬀort and retards progress because it blocks access to
complementary truths. Note the silly shortsightedness obvious in these paraphrased
restatements of scripture (2 Ne 28):
● 'Discovered truths! Scientific theories! We have observed nature and can explain most of it!
Future discoveries will only conﬁrm what we already know! We pre y much understand it
all! We have li le need for future discovery! And we have no need for revelation!’
● 'Spiritual truths! Revelations! We have God's Words and can explain most of them! Future
revelations will only conﬁrm what we already know! We pre y much understand it all and
have li le need for future revelation! And we have no need for scientific discovery!'
Sadly, both perspectives lead inexorably to situations in which the proverbial baby (truth) is
thrown out with the bathwater—or worse, to circumstances in which the infant is never even
conceived. Likewise, both a tudes produce a state described in scripture as 'ever learning but
never coming to a knowledge of the truth' (2 Tim 3). As complementary ﬂaws, fundamentalism
and dogmaism are rarely found in isolation, for overes ma ng one type of truth nearly always
requires underes ma ng the complementary type of truth. Thankfully, for ‘those with eyes to
see’ the light of truth rapidly exposes the siren songs of dogma c scientific and religious
fundamentalists for what they truly are: distorted, discordant, and gra ng.

Scholarly Discipleship

Scholarly Disciples are individuals who are deeply commi ed and keenly able to use God's
Words, God's Works, and their ability to reason in consistently identifying, understanding, and
applying discovered and revealed truth. In contrast, scientific and religious
fundamentalists/dogma sts are deeply commi ed and keenly able to use either God's Words
or God's Works to accomplish their respective aims. Despite the rigid par oning of truth that
misleads them, fundamentalists can be deeply dedicated, sincere, and well-inten oned
individuals that accomplish tremendous good in their respective spheres. Even so, they are
incomplete. At some point in their development, fundamentalists will need to acknowledge
their incompleteness and build complementary commitment and capacity. This will be a
profoundly painful experience for earnestly sincere fundamentalists—for acknowledging their
incompleteness will require acknowledging their (usually uninten onal) lack of respect for and
opposition to complementary truth.
Importantly, scholarly discipleship does not require advanced ability or achievement. Instead, it
requires appropriately valuing and skillfully using both God's Words and His Works to search for
and use each type of truth. As such, all can choose to be disciple scholars. Figure 1.2
summarizes basic ideas about scholarly disciples and fundamentalists. A er studying the
diagram, take a moment to ‘plot yourself’. In which direc on and how far along each axis do
you lie? In which quadrant does that place you? Are you comfortable where you are at? If not,
have you set goals?

8

Figure 1.2. Graphical representation of a ributes in individuals with varying commitments to
discipleship and scholarship. (Author illustration)
Of course, being a dedicated and skilled scholarly disciple does not eliminate apparent conﬂicts
between discovered and revealed truth. Un l we know all things, apparent conﬂicts are
inevitable—both between and inside the compa ble spheres of reasoned, revealed, and
discovered truths. Mature disciple scholars recognize that ambiguity and contiunous striving for
ever-more-valid preparatory knowledge are essen al aspects of ﬁnding truth. Figure 1.3
illustrates an approach to handling apparent conﬂict that uses the essen ally indisputable
character of observations to identify false interpretations. This approach allows us to minimize
error by elimina ng explanations that are incompa ble with observations of natural and wri en
scripture—which is tremendously useful in situations where we cannot fully reconcile
observations of God's Words and Works. Take a moment to study the diagram. Can you see
that additional revelation and discovery will shrink the ‘zone of truth’ and eventually identify
‘the truth’ represented by the white circle?

Figure 1.3. Illustration showing the u lity of using observations to identify false interpretations.
(Author illustration)

9
Scholarly disciples o en intuitively use this ‘zone of truth’ approach to clarify topics that appear
hopelessly irreconcilable to others. In contrast, scientific and religious fundamentalists usually
react strongly against such an approach, for they lack appropriate respect for the
complementary form of truth. For example, a scientific fundamentalist might declare, "How can
you possibly treat words wri en by individuals that know li le or nothing about nature in the
same way that you treat observations of nature?! Observing the physical world is
the only arbiter of truth about nature!" And a religious fundamentalist might declare, "How can
you possibly place observations of nature on the same foo ng as observations of wri en
scripture?! To understand nature, we must rely only on the Rock of Ages and not at all on the
ages of rocks!". Can you identify the problems with these perspectives? We hope so. If, instead,
you identify with one and ﬁnd the other irksome, that may indicate your leanings and might
prompt some goal se ng.
To close, we witness that discovery (scientific knowledge) and revelation (religious knowledge)
are complementary paths that to absolute truth that both provide authorita ve tests for the
truthfulness of logical inferences (reasoned knowledge). As such, we assert that these
approaches lead, of necessity, to truth and that apparent conﬂicts indicate incomplete
understanding. In the end, ﬁnding and evalua ng truth is a personal responsibility—so we hope
you have encountered ideas herein that help build your capacity as a scholarly disciple. These
might include the ability to:
● Understand the nature, similari es and diﬀerences between reasoned, discovered, and
revealed truth
● Hold both God’s Words and Works in appropriately high regard
● Clearly, consistently, and accurately dis nguish between observation and interpretation
● Understand and avoid fundamentalism and dogmaism
Sadly, too few who consider themselves honest, dedicated seekers and defenders of truth have
deeply developed understanding and ability in these and related areas. No ma er your present
or future life roles—as a student, parent, teacher, …—your abili es in areas like these will make
you be er at what you do, accelerate your discovery of truth, and dis nguish you from your
peers.

For The Curious
Albert Einstein famously said, “I have no special talents. I am only passionately curious.” We
love the intellectual hunger and humility captured by this quote. For anyone who shares
Albert’s passionate curiosity, we include possible ‘next steps’ at the end of many chapters.