1.2 Discovering Discovery 1. 2
How Science Works
Dr. Brian Tonks and Dr. Dan Moore, Physics and Geology Departments, BYU-Idaho

I want to know God’s thoughts … the rest are details. —Albert Einstein

Learning Objec ves:
● Understand and be able to identify each of the following: scientific observation/data, natural
pa ern, scientific interpretation, (empirical) testing, falsiﬁcation, scientific predic on, scientific
hypothesis, scientific theory and scientific underpinnings.
● Understand the characteristics of science, including the role of pa ern recognition & explanation in
science; how predic ons are used to test scientific ideas; the diﬀerence between hypotheses &
theories; and how conﬁdent we can be that scientific observations, hypotheses, & theories are true.
● Understand the func ons/beneﬁts of scientific theories and the role of faith in science.

Did you know that you're an amateur scientist? It’s true. At its core, science is nothing more
than recognizing and explaining natural paterns and then testing those explanations to ensure
that they accurately describe nature. You do this everyday. What separates those who
intuitively dabble in pa ern recognition and explanation from skilled scientists is commitment
to testing. Skilled scientists rigorously test the truthfulness of their explanations by comparing
the way nature ‘should be’ if the interpretation is true to the way nature ‘actually is’.
Explanations that cannot accurately account for the a ributes of nature are false. In contrast,
those that accurately describe the characteristics of nature are valid, they are true—because
they represent ‘knowledge of things as they are, were, and will be’.
So, although many people think of scientists as nerdy individuals in white lab coats, skilled
scientists are just normal people with honed observational and interpre ve ability, a deep
knowledge of a por on of nature, and an enhanced commitment to using the a ributes of
nature as the arbiter of truth about the physical world. Sadly, many have been blinded by
relying on lazy observation and untested interpretation. No matter your roles—artist, parent,
disciple, entrepreneur, etc.—rigorous commitment to testing will signiﬁcantly strengthen your
ability to ﬁnd truth about the physical world.

The Process and Meaning of Science 

As you know, human knowledge relies on two classes of truths—observations and
interpretations. scientific observations include individual descrip ons of nature and summary
descrip ons of natural paterns, and scientific interpretations include explanations of nature
known as scientific hypotheses and scientific theories. In addi on, science relies on

2 known as scientific hypotheses and scientific theories. In addi on, science relies on
foundational ideas we will refer to as scientific underpinnings.
scientific observations provide both the subject matter and the tests-of-truth of science.
scientific observations are descrip ons of experiences made with the senses (or with
instruments that extend the senses) that all rational humans experience objec vely—regardless
of their philosophical, poli cal, or religious outlook. scientific observations strive to describe
the actual characteristics of nature. Even so, human inability to observe every aspect of nature
ensures that scientific observations are incomplete. Fortunately, as humanity observes ever-
larger fractions of nature, our understanding of nature 'as it is' becomes more complete. This
ever-growing pool of scientific observations allows humanity to test scientific explanations ever
more fully.
Many scientific observations come in related sets. These natural paterns, some mes referred
to as scientific laws or principles, summarize large numbers of individual observations. For
example, when you drop something, it falls. By observing numerous dropped items, this natural
pa ern can be established: dropped things fall to Earth. When generalized more fully, we call
this pa ern the ‘law of gravity’. Likewise, the principle of biological inheritance summarizes a
natural pa ern comprised many observed parent-child relationships, in this way: oﬀspring
inherit characteristics from their parents.
In contrast to scientific observations—which describe nature, scientific hypotheses and theories
seek to explain how nature works. scientific hypotheses are explanations of how nature works
that are untested or have not yet been extensively tested. The extent of testing diﬀeren ates
scientific hypotheses and theories. A scientific hypothesis becomes a scientific theory when it
has been tested in every way known to humanity, using all available observations. Said
diﬀerently, scientific hypotheses become scientific theories when testing has demonstrated that
they accurately describes nature ‘as we know it’.
The testing of scientific theories never ceases, because humanity's ability to observe nature
grows con nuously—as individuals develop clever ways to test ideas using exis ng observations
and as new or be er scientific instruments produce new observations. Although testing can
pause for a me—as when observable predic ons are exhausted, it never ceases. Thus, as the
number of independent observations that fail to falsify a theory grows, so too grows our
conﬁdence that the scientific theory accurately describes nature. In these ways, scientific
knowledge—like all human knowledge—grows 'line upon line'.
The commitment of science to observational testing and the reality that humanity cannot
directly observe every aspect of natural systems ensures this important limitation: science
cannot directly demonstrate the truthfulness of scientific explanations like scientific theories.
Interes ngly, this limitation is directly related to the greatest strength of science—for science is
excep onally good at identify false explanations. For this reason, science uses falsiﬁcation to
indirectly evaluate the truthfulness of scientific explanations. Thus, science establishes true
explanations by identifying false explanations. This ‘last hypothesis standing’ approach to
distinguishing truth from error gives scientific knowledge its peculiarly powerful character. This

3 distinguishing truth from error gives scientific knowledge its peculiarly powerful character. This
core aspect of scientific knowledge is among the most widely misunderstood parts of science.
So, if you want to improve your grasp of science, deepen your understanding of the role of
falsiﬁcation in genera ng scientific knowledge.
Predic ons play a central role in identifying false explanations. scientific predic ons are
deduc ve conclusions of explanations that answer this ques on: if the hypothesis or theory is
true, what should we observe in nature? In other words, scientific predic ons identify aspects
of that physical world that must exist if the scientific explanation is true. Once the predic ons of
a par cular explanation are iden ﬁed, scientists design and carry out experiments or
observational campaigns that evaluate the validity of the predic ons. This endeavor, known as
empirical testing, provides humanity with formal ways of evalua ng the truthfulness of
scientific explanations. For, if the predic on is not observed, the explanation is falsiﬁed and
humanity must seek a new or revised explanation. In contrast, if the predic on is observed,
humanity’s conﬁdence in the truthfulness, accuracy, and validity of the scientific hypothesis or
theory drama cally increases.
Even so, no amount of testing can prove that a scientific theory is absolutely true, because the
possibility always exists that a future observation will falsify the explanation. Notably, falsifying
an extensively-tested scientific theory demonstrates that the explanation is not universal, that it
has limited ability to accurately describe nature, that it has been disqualiﬁed as a candidate for
‘absolute truth’. However, falsiﬁed scientific theories remain ‘true’ in important ways—because
all scientific theories validly describe each aspect of the physical world in which testing has
failed to falsify them. As a result, extensively-tested scientific theories that are falsiﬁed
con nue, for all eternity, to be valid descrip ons of nature in the areas in which observations
could not falsify them. This is why people can con nue to produc vely use the long-ago-
falsiﬁed no on of gravity to navigate their daily lives. (More on this later.)
We hope that you now have a more nuanced understanding of the meaning of this important
statement: “scientific theories are true.” Moreover, we hop that you understand that scientific
explanations are powerful and authorita ve because scientific predic ons and empirical testing
ensure that scientific theories accurately describe nature ‘as it is’—and that the self-correc ng
character of science distinguishes scientific explanations from most other forms of human
explanation.
Correctly understanding the meaning of scientific explanations is an essen al prerequisite to
produc vely interac ng with scientific ideas. For example, it is important to understand that
scientific theories contain abundant truth and represent humanity's very best preparatory
explanations of natural processes. In addi on, your knowledge of science should now help you
understand that when someone says, “using new observations, scientists have proven …”, they
actually mean (or should mean), “scientists have made new observations that fail to falsify …”.
What’s more, you should now be able to see how the word ‘theory’ is used very diﬀerently in
science than it is in everyday speech. For example, when most people say ‘theory’, they mean
‘hypothesis’. Although it's okay to use ‘theory’ to mean ‘hypothesis’ in everyday speech—so
long as you are clear about how you or others are using it, its never okay to mean ‘educated

4 long as you are clear about how you or others are using it, its never okay to mean ‘educated
guess’ when referring to scientific theories.
Importantly, science is a godly endeavor that allows humanity to make steady progress—line
upon line—towards the goal of understanding nature perfectly. Even so, scientific knowledge is
just one of two authorita ve paths to absolute truth. The other path is revelation. These two
paths are authorita ve because each provides reliable methods for demonstra ng the validity
of explanations: correspondence with nature and conﬁrmation by God. In this way, discovery
and revelation form complementary paths to truth that, for the dedicated student of truth, can
become ‘one in thine hand’ (Ezekiel 37).

The Importance of scientific Theories

Despite their limitations, scientific theories ﬁll three essen al func ons: they explain how
nature works—how natural processes produce the observable physical world, connect
apparently unrelated aspects of nature, and guide future research. In their explanatory role,
scientific theories represent explanations of nature in which humanity can place tremendous
conﬁdence, because extensive empirical testing has demonstrated that these theories
correspond to nature across presently available observations. In their role as synthesizers,
scientific theories accurately describe relationships between large sets of otherwise
disconnected observations and illuminate natural paterns that would otherwise remain
undiscovered. Finally, in their role as guides, scientific theories make testable predic ons about
what should exist if the theory is true. These predic ons guide human inquiry and are thus vital
to perfec ng human knowledge of the natural world.
In addi on to these important func ons, scientific theories provide two important beneﬁts:
they improve human lives and sa sfy human yearning to understand the world around us. The
knowledge provided by scientific theories provide empowers humanity to improve human life
through inven ons and by designing solu ons to natural problems such as earthquakes,
plagues, and climate change. Of course, science is only beneﬁcial if humanity chooses to use
scientific knowledge correctly—and these choices are guided by principles that lie outside the
domain of science, in areas such as morality and sociology. In addi on to improving our lives,
scientific theories sa sfy humanity’s nearly insa able curiosity—by helping us understand the
nature and workings of the physical world. If you, like most humans, are you curious about
nature, take a moment to reﬂect on the aspects that most fascinate you and things you’d like to
do to learn more about them.
As you can see, scientific theories facilitate human discovery and bless humanity.

The Role of Faith in Science 

All human explanations and actions rely on foundational no ons we’ll refer to as
underpinnings. For example, opening your front door to go somewhere relies on the no on
that the rest of the Universe con nued uninterrupted while you were in your house. Likewise,

5
that the rest of the Universe con nued uninterrupted while you were in your house. Likewise,
praying relies on the no on that there is a higher power with which humans can communicate.
As with all other human endeavors, foundational no ons underpin scientific action and
explanation. scientific underpinnings are ideas about fundamental aspects of nature that allow
humanity to develop explanations of natural phenomena. scientific underpinnings are dis nct
from scientific observations and theories. Examples of scientific underpinnings include human
beliefs about our capacity to understand the universe and about the role of uniform natural
processes in producing the observable Universe.
Ancient Greek philosophers were the ﬁrst to systema cally accept that the human intellect is
capable of understanding natural paterns. No previous known group—hunter-gatherers,
agriculturalists, or the early civilizations of Sumer, Egypt, Rome, India, or China—was so fully
commi ed to this important idea. Later, during the Enlightenment in Western Europe,
naturalists built important aspects of modern science by relying on underpinnings related to
natural processes. These included accep ng that nature operates according to lawful processes
that func on uniformly everywhere and everywhen. Said diﬀerently, this scientific
underpinning states that the natural mechanisms discovered by science apply throughout space
and me. Modern civilization witnesses to the validity and wild success of scientific
underpinnings such as these.
When initially employed, scientific underpinnings are no more than untested ideas—
assump ons—that serve as a useful foundation upon which to begin interpre ng nature.
However, as humanity uses these underpinnings successfully, our conﬁdence their validity
grows—in much the same way that increasing evidence produces theories from hypothesis.
Despite their stupendous success, scientific underpinnings are preparatory, not absolute—and
progress in human understanding will identify ‘line upon line’ improvements to these important
ideas in which we exercise such faith.
Although surprising to some, faith is a foundational aspect of modern science. As you know,
faith is the basis for accep ng something as true that has not yet been observed or
demonstrated (Hebrews 11). Although faith is not blind acceptance, it relies on evidence-
without-proof. Said diﬀerently, faith is a belief in something that we don’t yet understand that is
strong enough to cause us to as if it were true.
Religious belief and action, of course, are founded in faith. Few have observed God, and yet the
primary spiritual experiences of individuals have produced faith that God is real. As these
individuals act on this faith, addi onal experiences increase their certainty that God is real—
and this knowledge leads them to live their lives according to this reality. Faith plays precisely
the same role in science.
For example, no one can make every observation. A million life mes would not be enough. As
such, individual scientists must presently accept the observations made of others. Even so, this
acceptance strengthens as humanity repeats and extends observations and tests. In addi on, all
scientific interpretations requires that we accept the underpinnings humanity uses to explain
nature. For these reasons—and because the truthfulness of scientific theories is established by

6 nature. For these reasons—and because the truthfulness of scientific theories is established by
falsiﬁcation—using scientific theories requires faith. Of course—as with all matters of faith, our
conﬁdence in the validity of scientific observations, underpinnings, and theories grows as we
successfully use these no ons to further inves gate, understand, and manipulate nature.
In short—like all human perspec ves, action, and knowledge, faith forms the foundation of
science because it requires acceptance without perfect knowledge. This acceptance-before-
understanding aspect of human knowledge makes it tremendously important that we each
accurately assess the certainty of our knowledge—for over- or undervaluing knowledge distorts
faith and diminishes our ability to ﬁnd truth—philosophical, scientific, and religious.

For The Curious
Understanding Science: How Science Really Works, a UC Berkely website funded by the U.S.
National Science Foundation. undsci.berkeley.edu/ar cle/intro_01.
Knowledge and Wonder: Natural World as Man Knows It by Victor Weisskop (1962, Anchor).
Philosophy of Science: A Very Short Introduc on by Samir Okasha (2002, Oxford University
Press).

