1.3 Line Upon Line 1. 3 L i n e U p o n L i n e
The Development of Science and Scien ﬁc Ideas
Dr. Brian Tonks and Dr. Dan Moore, Physics and Geology Departments, BYU-Idaho

No lie can live forever. —Thomas Carlisle

Learning Objectives:
● Understand and be able to identify each of the following: how falsiﬁcation is used in science, the
meaning/u lity of falsiﬁed scien ﬁc theories, and how new scien ﬁc theories emerge from earlier
theories.
● Illustrate how scien ﬁc theory succession occurs using the transi on from Earth- to Sun-centered
theories of the Universe and the transi on from Newton’s Theory of Gravitation to Einstein’s
Theory of Relativity.

Science as a path to truth emerged slowly from a foundation laid in ancient Greece. These early
thinkers used pure rational thought—reasoned knowledge—to explore reality. They were
deeply commi ed to the underpinning that humanity is capable of understanding nature, but
they lacked key aspects of science. Greek philosophers like Plato believed that the senses
(observations) could not be trusted, that rational thought was the only test of truth about
nature—because the Greeks believed that their gods rou nely used supernatural powers and
deceived mortals.
Despite this limi ng perspective, Plato’s student Aristotle made important progress in eleva ng
the importance of objective observations—but his commitment to observations as a test for
truth was inconsistent. Further progress was made as Christianity infused Western Civilization.
These Christians believed that God created nature and that, as a being of truth, God could not
lie or deceive. During the Renaissance, this trust grew into a deepened commitment to
objective observations. In this way, scien ﬁc observations became an important tool in the
search for truth.
Today, humanity recognizes the limitations of scien ﬁc underpinnings, but early Greek thinkers
rigidly considered many underpinnings as unassailable. For example, Plato argued that celes al
objects like the Sun, Moon, and planets could only move in perfect circles because they were
perfect objects. Likewise, ancient Greeks rigidly accepted some explanatory models as true—so
long as they were logically consistent. Despite the tremendous accomplishments of these early
philosophers, they failed to consistently use observational tests and to appropriately consider
the limits of underpinnings and explanations. These shortcomings blocked their search for truth
and weakened their ability to generate practical applications of their explanatory models.

2
During the Renaissance, modern science emerged as humanity began to place observational
tes ng in its proper place as the arbiter of truth about how nature works. As science developed,
humanity was able to approach underpinnings and explanatory models less rigidly and
recognize practical applications that improve the human experience—such as scien ﬁc
medicine and modern transportation.
The development of humanity’s ideas about the Universe beau fully illustrates the emergence
of modern science and powerfully exempliﬁes the self-correcting nature of scien ﬁc knowledge
—which results from a commitment to observation as arbiter of truth about the physical world.
We begin with Aristotle’s no ons about nature, and then track that forward through the ideas
of Copernicus and Newton to the implications of Einstein’s famous ‘relativity’.

From Reasoned to Discovered Truths

Aristotle’s Universe divided nature into a corrup ble earthly realm made of earth, water, air,
and ﬁre and an unchanging heavenly sphere composed of quintessence. This model contained
explanatory power but rigidly embraced gross inaccuracies and produced many logical-but-false
conclusions. For instance, it asserted that Earth is stationary at the center of the Universe,
because it is made of the heaviest element. During the Middle Ages, dogma c adherence to
Aristotelian explanations s ﬂed human progress—including the rejec on of Aristarchus’ more
accurate Sun-centered model of the Universe.
Although the Aristotelian Universe seems silly to the modern mind, it provided rational
explanations for aspects of nature that humanity had observed but could not explain naturally
—things like rain falling from the sky. Despite these successes, Aristotelian explanations failed
to accurately describe aspects of nature like the forward mo on of thrown objects and the
orbits of planets. Sadly, instead of accep ng the inaccuracies and developing better models, the
ancients and their successors clung tenaciously to their beloved underpinnings and created
convoluted modiﬁcations that ‘preserved’ false explanations.
Following the fall of the Roman Empire in the 4th century AD, many Greek and Roman ideas
were lost to Western Civilization. Then, from ~1000-1400 AD European scholars rediscovered
these ideas in Arabic libraries, translated them into La n, and began to reintegrate the
a tudes, assump ons, and explanations of classical an quity into Western Civilization. In areas
such as governance and natural ‘science’ the ideas of Plato and Aristotle were par cularly
inﬂuen al.
This integration, which included the fusion of the Christian plan of salvation and the
Aristotlelian Universe, exempliﬁed the Western expectation of consistency—the no on that all
aspects of the Western worldview should comprise a harmonious whole. At the me, many
non-Western socie es had no such expectation. The integration strategically located humanity
on Earth’s surface, between the perfect and unchanging home of God in the heavens and the
disorderly and hellish abode of Satan in Earth’s interior. In this model, righteous souls
accumulated ‘quintessence’ during life, which carried them into the heavens when they died—

3
accumulated ‘quintessence’ during life, which carried them into the heavens when they died—
and disobedient individuals accumulated ‘earth’ during life and sank to join the devil when they
died.
In this way, the plan of salvation became inextricably connected to false ideas about nature—
like the false no on that Earth lies at the center of the Universe. This unfortunate fusion of
spiritual worldview with falsehoods about the physical world ini ated the common Western
no on of warring science and religion. For, as humanity began discovering truths about nature,
dogma c Middle-Age religionists sought to defend spiritual truths using erroneous ideas about
the physical world. In so doing, they worked vigorously to repress developing scien ﬁc ideas,
which were true.
Unfortunately, many modern religionists blindly persevere in this eﬀort by seeking to defend
important spiritual truths using false no ons about nature. This eﬀort is doomed, for nothing
good comes of protecting truth with error. Sadly, scien ﬁc dogma sts have returned the favor
over the centuries, by trying to use true no ons about nature as clubs with which to bludgeon
spiritual no ons like God’s existence or life’s purpose. This eﬀort is likewise doomed. As you can
see, the so-called ba le between science and religion is a struggle between scien ﬁc and
religious dogma sts, not between discovered and revealed knowledge. Lamentably, many well-
inten oned people are seduced by the siren songs of scien ﬁc and religious fundamentalists.
Now, let’s return to the development of scien ﬁc ideas. Despite its inaccuracy, the Aristotelian
model of the Universe was not replaced un l humanity developed a reliable path to discovered
knowledge in the 1700s, nearly two millennia atter Aristotle died. This path, known today as
‘science’, uses objective observations and empirical tes ng to identify false explanations of
nature.
Some of the individuals that helped develop scien ﬁc explanations of the Universe are shown
in Figure 1.4. Copernicus, true Renaissance man, was trained in law and medicine, proﬁcient in
music, active as an administrator of his Catholic parish, and the most inﬂuen al astronomer of
his generation. Copernicus, who considered Aristotle’s Earth-centered no ons ‘oﬀensive to
common sense’, used mathema cal arguments to develop a Sun-centered model of the
Universe. Knowing that the dogma c religionists of his day would punish him for opposing an
Earth-centered Universe, Copernicus’ Sun-centered model was not published un l just before
his death. The improved accuracy of his method caused astronomers to adopt his mathema cal
method as a ‘useful but not real’ tool.
Before long, the growing importance of objective observation as tests for truth and the work of
astronomers like Tycho Brahe, Johannes Kepler, and Galileo Galilee grew support for the Sun-
center Copernican Universe. For example, Tycho’s 1572 observations of comets and a new star
demonstrated that the heavens change, which falsiﬁed the Aristotelian asser on that the
heavens were eternally unchanging. Later, Johannes Kepler used Tycho’s observations to
demonstrate that planets follow oval (ellip cal) paths, not circular paths—which falsiﬁed
another cherished Greek underpinning. With several dogmas falsiﬁed, humanity began to
wonder if Greek-philosophy-infused Christian dogmas might be wrong about other things.

4

Figure 1.4. Important individuals in the discovery of progressively more accurate models of the
Universe. (Author illustration, images from Wikimedia).
Galileo, o en considered the father of modern science, was among the ﬁrst to make
astronomical observations using a telescope. His observations of mountains on the Moon,
changing sunspots, the phases of Venus, and four moons orbi ng Jupiter strengthened the
growing realization that the Aristotelian worldview was false. What’s more, Galileo’s
observations of moving objects falsiﬁed the Aristotelian no on that heavier objects fall faster
than light objects. Galileo’s keen intellect approached the study of mo on by simplifying the
complexity of moving objects. This approach introduced a new scien ﬁc underpinning called
reduc onism that strengthened humanity’s ability to learn about natural processes and laid the
foundation for the work of Isaac Newton.
Galileo was an aggressive advocate of the Sun-centered Theory of the Universe. As a result,
The Inquisi on censured him, forced him to recant, and placed him under house arrest for the
rest of his life. Although this episode has been interpreted in many ways, it certainly
strengthened an increasingly chilly relationship between science and religion. The work of
Galileo and predecessors caused many to begin examining the underpinnings humanity used to
interpret the natural world.
These and other inspired discoveries began, line upon line, to remove the shackles of
dogma sm with which Western Civilization was bound and to identify the principles required to
discover truths about the natural world. This reexamination of underpinnings culminated in the
work of Sir Isaac Newton, who used key insights to synthesize the work of earlier thinkers. For
example, Newton formulated laws of mo on and gravitation and a Theory of Gravity. As the
ﬁrst to explain how Sun-centered planetary systems form, Newton completed the Copernican
revolu on. Moreover, he established modern science by enshrining observation as the arbiter
of truth about the natural world.
In the centuries following Newton, his explanations were tested in as many ways as humanity
could devise. The numerous conﬁrmations of predicted observations produced extremely high
conﬁdence that Newton’s ideas were true. Then, in the early 1900s Albert Einstein

5 conﬁdence that Newton’s ideas were true. Then, in the early 1900s Albert Einstein
demonstrated that Newton’s Theory of Gravity was false, that gravitational forces do not exist.
Astoundingly, Einstein demonstrated that what we think of as gravity does not result from
invisible a ractive forces, but from something altogether diﬀerent.

Theory Succession: From Newton to Einstein 

Newton’s Theory of Gravity is tremendously successful at describing how objects move
in many situations. In fact, for more than two centuries humanity used the very best
instruments in the most clever ways to try to falsify the Theory of Gravity. We tested the theory
over and over and over again, in every imaginable way. But humanity could not ﬁnd a situation
that wasn’t accurately described by Newton's Theory of Gravity. The theory worked to explain
how planets move and objects fall—every single me. Astonishingly, Gravity Theory allowed
humanity to predict and observe a never-before-seen planet, Neptune. Following so many
conﬁrmations, humanity's conﬁdence in the validity of this Theory was incredibly high—for
only very true explanations can so consistently describe things ‘as they are’.
At the me, humanity rightly considered that the Theory of Gravity was true. How true?
True enough to correctly explain all the relevant aspects of nature that humanity had observed
to that point. However—despite centuries of stupendous explanatory success—gravitational
forces are not real, and Einstein’s work proved it. If it seems confusing that the Theory of
Gravity can be both 'false' and 'true', don't be too alarmed—you're in good company. Much of
humanity has yet to master the ideas required to resolve this apparent conundrum.
If you don’t take the opportunity to understand this, you will struggle to interact productively
with the scien ﬁc ideas that permeate your life.
So, what is gravity? To visualize gravity, imagine you swing a ball-on-a-string overhead. When
you do, the string keeps the ball from ﬂying away. Make sense? Now, similar to the string,
gravitational forces e planets like Earth to stars like the Sun. So, gravity—the central idea in
Newton's Theory of Gravity—is an unseen force that pulls objects together. For example,
dropped objects fall because Earth's gravitational force pulls on them. This is how humanity
explained the mo on of dropped, thrown, and orbi ng objects from the late 1600s through the
early 1900s—and it's the idea that most people s ll use to explain these things. But the idea is
false.
Observations sugges ng that gravitational forces don’t exist began appearing in the mid-1800s.
Mercury provided one such example. Try as they might, humanity could not explain Mercury’s
orbit using gravitational forces. Then, in the early 1900s Albert Einstein iden ﬁed important
groups of observations that he proposed could not be explained by Newton's Theory of Gravity.
Eventually, Einstein’s work proved that gravitational forces do not exist. In doing so, Einstein
demonstrated the limits of applicability of Newton's Theory. In addi on, Einstein developed a
new theory. This new theory was able to explain all the observations—those that gravity could
explain and those it could not.

6
So, what happened to gravity? Humanity replaced this incredibly useful preparatory truth with
a more-true explanation of how things move called the Theory of Relativity. In this way, limited
preparatory knowledge, that for a me validly explained all human observations, was replaced
by more-true preparatory knowledge. Remarkably, recognizing the limits of a preparatory truth
like gravity doesn’t destroy its u lity. Thus, despite being false, gravity will forever be a valid
descrip on of the physical world—but only in those areas of nature that it accurately describes.
In this way, preparatory truths form useful approximations to absolute truths.
This changing character of scien ﬁc explanations frustrates some. Inexperienced truth seekers
some mes expect the whole truth 'right now!', and dogma c fundamentalists believe they
already 'pre y much have the whole truth'. These individuals some mes hold perspectives like
this, "Those darned scien sts claim to be so certain about everything, but they're always
changing their minds. I see right through their charade. They use their popularity, pres ge, and
so-called 'certainty' to foist falsehoods—the philosophies of men—on the unsuspecting, to
diminish faith, and to carry out Satan's work. Well, I won't be fooled!!!" Perhaps you know
someone who sees science in this light.
In contrast, experienced scholarly disciples are not surprised when scien ﬁc explanations
change, such as when a scien ﬁc theory is falsiﬁed and succeeded by a more-true scien ﬁc
theory. In fact, they expect this to happen because they recognize that all knowledge—
discovered, revealed, and reasoned—accumulates 'line upon line, precept upon precept, ... un l
the perfect day'. In addi on, scholarly disciples do not equate ‘philosophies of men’ with
scien ﬁc theories. Instead, they recognize that ‘philosophies of men’ are reasoned ideas that
lack the correspondence with reality that characterizes discovered truths. Importantly, if you
want all the truth ‘right now!’, prefer to falsely classify discovered knowledge as ‘the
philosophies of men’, or want to consider the truth you have as 'pre y much all you need',
searching for truth may be the wrong endeavor for you.
Notably, remaining deeply commi ed to and defending already-discovered explanations while
simultaneously searching for more-true replacements produces a dynamic tension that
characterizes scholarly disciples. Living in this frame of mind tempts some to throw up their
hands and exclaim, "This is all just way too hard and frustrating. I'll wait un l God sets these
faithless scien sts straight." A ractive as it seems to some, this approach is deeply ﬂawed.
Those who choose to ignore the 'lines' God gives us now will likely ﬁnd themselves unprepared
to understand or acknowledge future revelations and inspired discoveries. Now, lest the bar to
scholarly discipleship appear una ainably high, we remind that approach,
desire, and progress are essen al, but accomplishment and location on the path that leads to
truth are not.
At this point people are usually anxious to learn how objects actually fall and move. Although
the full explanation requires years of training, the basic no ons of relativity are within the reach
of all. The core idea of the Theory of Relativity can be expressed in this simple sentence: Matter
tells space me how to curve and curved space me tells matter how to move. Read that
sentence again, and then study Figure 1.5—which illustrates how matter (mass) alters

7 sentence again, and then study Figure 1.5—which illustrates how matter (mass) alters
space me. As you can see, an object placed on the dimpled grid would ‘fall towards’ or orbit
the Sun or Earth.
So, what humanity thought were gravitational forces were in fact the product of curved
space me. That is, warped space me causes dropped objects to ‘fall’ and orbit. It's true—at
least far more true than gravity. Like Gravity Theory, the Theory of Relatively could one day be
replaced by a more-true explanation, but for now it’s the truest explanation humanity has—and
everyone who cares about truth is really happy to have it.

Figure 1.5. Image illustrating how the Sun and Earth ‘stretch’ or ‘curve’ a grid represen ng two
dimensions of space me. (Author illustration)
