1.4 The Order of Order 1. 4
How Order Forms
Dr. Dan Moore and Dr. Brian Tonks, Geology & Physics Departments, BYU-Idaho

Look deep into nature, and then you will understand everything better. —Albert Einstein
Learning Objectives:
● Understand and be able to identify each of the following: order, disorder, emergent order, agent-
designed construc on, and lawful self-assembly.
● Understand how agent-designed assembly produces order and how lawful self-assembly produces
order.
● Evaluate examples of ordered systems and identify how the order arose—through agent-designed
assembly or through lawfully self-assembly.

Having completed a brief introduc on to truth, we turn now to a second central ques on: how
order emerges in nature. Order is a patterned arrangement of component parts, disorder is a
random distribu on or chao c mixture of those parts, and emergent order is order that
spontaneously self-assembles without the interven on of an agent. No doubt you have no ced
that much of the matter in nature is organized and found in ‘clumps’—in objects like cell
phones, cats, and planets. Moreover, these organized clumps are generally separated by spaces
containing less and less-well-organized matter—like the air between your cell phone and cat or
the mostly-empty space between planets. As you’ll recall, science is the natural human ac vity
of recognizing and interpre ng patterns—and the clumpiness and order in nature represent
fundamentally important natural patterns.
Have you ever wondered where this order comes from?
In some cases, order forms where agents design and construct it, using component parts like
bolts and sheet metal that cannot act for themselves. The order found in automobiles arises in
this way: designers establish the pattern that builders use to assemble the car from fabricated
parts made of metal, rubber, glass, etc. We refer to this kind of order and the processes that
produce it as agent-designed assembly. Although humans commonly act as agents in producing
order, all organisms that inten onally construct patterns likewise act as agents. For example,
birds build nests and bees build honeycomb. In each case, the animal places ‘unacting parts’
(like twigs and wax) according to a pattern (the nest or honeycomb).
Most people understand how agent-designed assembly produces order because that’s the way
humans create order. Many religious fundamentalists believe that this is the main or only way
that ordered systems form. However, order also arises naturally from lawful interactions
between component parts that act for themselves without the interven on of an agent. The

2 between component parts that act for themselves without the interven on of an agent. The
organized ﬂow of water in a river forms in this way, as do the ordered orbits of planetary bodies
in our Solar System. In both cases, lawful interactions between components parts cause order
to emerge from disorder without the interven on of an agent. We refer to this kind of order
and the processes that produce it as lawful self-assembly.
Most people are familiar with lawfully-assembled order. atter all, pre y much everyone knows
that rain forms pools of water because of lawful interactions between rainwater and gravity
(curvature of space me)—and not because agents build each pool by manipula ng bits of
water. Strangely, familiarity with lawfully-self-assembled order does not always translate into
recogni on that lawful self-assembly produces the order found in nature.
Interes ngly, organisms can act both as agents that assemble patterns or they can be parts in
lawfully-self-assembled patterns. When humans or termites build houses, they act as agents. In
contrast, when hungry people spontaneously form a line at the serving table atter the readiness
of the meal is announced, humans act as parts in the self-assembly of the line. Other examples
of organisms acting as parts in spontaneously-assembled patterns include a school of ﬁsh that
forms a pattern to avoid a predator or a group of ﬂying birds that form a pattern to use less
energy.
To distinguish between patterns produced by organism-as-agent and organism-as-part, focus on
what the organism is doing. Agent-assembled patterns result when organisms place ‘parts that
cannot act for themselves’ according to a pattern, and self-assembled patterns emerge when
organisms ‘act for themselves’ according to rules. Thus, when beavers build dams they act as
agents, but when individual coral polyps posi on themselves relative to other members of the
colony they act as parts in the lawfully-assembled pattern we call coral.
Signiﬁcantly, self-assembled systems can function during assembly, but agent-assembled
systems typically cannot. For example, cars aren’t fully functional un l atter every part has been
placed in its assigned location and connected together according to the design, but streams act
to move water at all scales—from the smallest rivulet to largest river.

Examples of Order E x a m p l e s o f O r d e r

Now that you understand some basic aspects of how order forms, explore the examples of
order illustrated in Figure 1.6—a house, chair, and crystal. Take a moment to think deeply about
each example, and then use the ques ons below to determine whether the order in each
system self-assembles or is assembled by an agent.
1. What parts form the ordered pattern?
2. How do the parts interact? Can they act for themselves or must they be acted upon? Is an
agent involved in design or assembly?
3. Can the ordered system fulﬁll its use, function, or purpose at each stage of construc on, or
only atter full assembly?
4. Did agent-designed assembly or lawful self-assembly produce the order?

3

Figure 1.6. Images illustrating the order that comprises a house, a chair, and sugar crystals
grown on a s ck. (Images from Wikimedia)
atter you answer the ques ons for each example, check your understanding using the answers
on the last page of this chapter.

How Order Forms H o w O r d e r F o r m s

The systems described above exemplify diﬀerent ways that order can arise from disorder
(chaos). Interes ngly, some ordered patterns can form via agent-designed assembly or lawful
self-assembly. A ‘Sierpinski Triangle’ (Figure 1.7) is one such pattern.

Figure 1.7. Le : A pattern known to mathema cians as a ‘Sierpinski triangle’. Middle: The
starting condi ons for ‘The Chaos Game’. Right: The pattern produced by following the rules of
‘the game’. (Author illustration; le and right images from Wikimedia)
For example, there are two ways to form a Sierpinski triangle by agent-designed assembly—
using a ‘blueprint’ and by following instruc ons. To produce a Sierpinski triangle using a
blueprint, simply draw the le most pattern (’blueprint’) in Figure 1.7 on a blank sheet of paper.
You can also create this same pattern by following these instruc ons: on a blank sheet of paper,
draw an upward-poin ng triangle; then, place dots midway between each point and draw lines
between the dots; ﬁnally, repeat the dot-and-line step for each upward-poin ng triangle inside
the original triangle.
Most people ﬁnd it surprising that the ordered pattern of a Sierpinski Triangle can also form via
lawful self-assembly—by following the rules (laws) of ‘The Chaos Game’. If you’re interested,

4 lawful self-assembly—by following the rules (laws) of ‘The Chaos Game’. If you’re interested,
give it a try. The ‘game’ begins with the setup shown at middle in Figure 1.7. (Incidentally, it
doesn’t matter where you place the starting gray dot.) ‘The game’ is played by repea ng these
two steps:
1. Roll your die to identify one of a black labeled dots in Figure 1.7. (For example, if you roll a
‘3’ use the dot labeled ‘3-4’.)
2. Draw a dot halfway between the last dot you drew (the gray dot, if you’re just starting) and
the dot iden ﬁed by your roll of the die.
atter repea ng these steps several hundred mes, the complex Sierpinski Triangle at right in
Figure 1.7 begins to emerge. Then, the fully pattern emerges atter ~10,000 iterations.
Remarkably, no matter how many dots are added, the Sierpinski-Triangle pattern persists—and
the open spaces never ﬁll. If you don’t believe this, search the Internet for “the Chaos Game”.
There are several videos and simulations that illustrate the process.
Whether it’s a Sierpinski Triangle or birds ﬂying in a ‘V’ pattern, order emerges spontaneously
in law-based systems. This counterintui ve reality is the central message of lawful self-
assembly. Before proceeding, take a moment to consider your present perspective about what
produces the order found in physical systems like crystals, humans, and stars. Does an agent or
agents generate the order found in these and other natural systems, or do lawful interactions
cause ordered patterns to emerge spontaneously? This important ques on will guide the
remainder of our journey together.

5
Answers
Constructing a House and Assembling a Chair
1. Houses are built from various types of lumber, cement or stone, wiring, rooﬁng, etc., and
chairs like the one shown are assembled from prebuilt parts.
2. The parts of a house or chair can do nothing themselves. Agents must design and build
them.
3. Par ally assembled structures like wiring or arm rests cannot ﬁll their function un l
complete.
4. The order represented by the house and chair are examples of agent-designed assembly in
which the designer created a blueprint or instruc ons that the builders followed.
Forming Candy Crystals
1. Sugar crystals are built from sugar molecules.
2. The molecules interact lawfully through collisions and bonding. These interactions do not
involve an agent.
3. Par ally assembled sugar crystals retain all the a ributes and functions of fully-developed
crystals.
4. The order represented by the sugar crystals is an example of lawful self-assembly. The
crystalline order emerges spontaneously without the interven on of an agent. (To be fair, in
this example an agent mixed the ingredients, but this need not be. Crystals such as
snowﬂakes, hard water deposits, and quartz form spontaneously in nature without the
involvement of agents.)