1.5 Organizing Order 1. 5 
How Lawful Self-Assembly Creates Order in Nature
Dr. Dan Moore and Dr. Brian Tonks, Geology and Physics Departments, BYU-Idaho

Let us permit nature to have her way. She understands her business be er than we do. —Michel
de Montaigne
It turns out that an eerie type of chaos can lurk just behind a facade of order—and yet, deep
inside the chaos lurks an even eerier type of order. ―Douglas R. Hofstadter
Learning objectives:
● Understand and be able to identify each of the following: system, system state, parts of a system,
governing processes, transitions between system states, pushes, and responses. Also, understand
the role of energy in emergent order in natural systems.
● Be able to analyze the development of a natural system in terms of a series of system states
separated by transitions.
● Understand that God’s Words & Works provide consistent witnesses regarding the origin of order in
nature.

Order—the patterned arrangement of component parts—dominates some por ons of nature
while chaos characterizes other areas. Agent-designed order is conceived in minds, assembled
by agents, and accounts for all human-built order, including the ordered patterns that comprise
cakes and computers. In contrast, self-assembled order emerges spontaneously through lawful
interac ons between component parts and produces the order found in natural system like
con nents and chimpanzees. Most of us understand agent-designed order well because we
con nuously create in this way. Below, we will help build your intuition of self-assembled order.

Lawful Self Assembly
If you want to understand a sporing event like a football (soccer) match, it helps to learn about
each part of the game (the ball, players, goal, and referees), the rules that govern the
interac ons between the parts, and the purpose of the contest (to put the ball in the goal).
Understanding the nature and development of ordered systems is no diﬀerent. When studying
order in nature, we must accurately describe the system we’re studying, the parts that
comprise the system, the governing processes that cause the parts to interact, and the state of
the system that results from those interac ons (Figure 1.8).
The state of a system describes its condition or mode, which can be ordered or disordered.
Chaos exists in both disordered and ordered states. In disordered states, the chaos dominates.
In ordered states, ﬁne-scale chaos can make systems unpredictable. As systems change, they

2
In ordered states, ﬁne-scale chaos can make systems unpredictable. As systems change, they
can transition from one state to another.

Figure 1.8. Conceptual illustration of a system comprised of interacing component parts.
Systems, the por on of nature being inves gated, are separated from their surroundings (the
rest of the Universe) by boundaries. (Adapted from Wikimedia)
A football (soccer) match illustrates how these conven ons allow us to formally analyze
systems. In this example, the system boundary is the outer edge of the playing ﬁeld; the parts
are the players on each team, ball, goals, coaches, referees, and ﬁeld lines; and the governing
processes are the rules of the game. During the many possible game states—for example, the
‘before game’, ‘normal play’, and ‘penalty kick’ states—the parts of the system interact in
dis nct ways. These interac ons are fueled by the ﬂow of energy through the system—as
illustrated in Figure 1.9 (le ). In the match, interac ons are fueled by the food consumed and
oxygen breathed by the par cipants.

Figure 1.9. Le . Illustration showing how the ﬂow of energy through the a system can drive
interac ons that produce ordered states. When energy ﬂow stops, order typically disintegrates
into a disordered state. Middle. Illustration showing how governing processes cause
incremental changes (black lines) that can can alter the state of the system. Right. Illustration
showing how systems can respond to external pushes by accentuaing or oppose the eﬀects of
the push (green and red lines). (Author illustrations)
The ﬂow of energy through systems is essen al in establishing and maintaining ordered states.
Without this ﬂow, disordered states usually result. Inside systems, governing processes can

3
Without this ﬂow, disordered states usually result. Inside systems, governing processes can
cause conditions to gradually change, as illustrated in Figure 1.9 (middle). Far from a transition,
even large changes don’t always aﬀect the state of the system. In contrast, even very small
changes near a transition can produce a new state. In the football example, the passage of
numerous seconds during the ‘normal play’ state of a match has little eﬀect on that state, but
the passage of the last second ends the match and transitions the system to the ‘a er game’
state.
Systems experience the eﬀects of external processes as pushes. Figure 1.9 (right) shows how
systems react when pushed. We refer to these reac ons as responses or feedbacks, and we call
responses that accentuate pushes posi ve responses and responses that oppose pushes
negative responses. Negative responses usually act to preserve system states and posi ve
responses typically move systems toward transitions to new states. In our football example, a
change in weather or an energe c crowd are good examples of pushes that would the system
to respond.
Analyzing nature systematically allows humanity to critically discover how natural systems
func on. Below, we illustrate this powerful approach using Table 1.1 to analyze systems
composed of geese, ice, and oil.
Table 1.1 A simple template for analyzing natural systems.

Geese. Figure 1.10 shows disordered and ordered states of Canada Geese. Give these two
states some thought. Also, imagine how a predator approaching the ﬁeld of feeding geese could
cause a change in state. Finally, consider how the ordered V-shape emerges once the geese take
ﬂight. Use Table 1.1 and a piece of scratch paper to analyze this system. Then, compare your
answers to those found in Table 1.2 below.

Figure 1.10. Photos illustraing a transition between chaotically distributed Canada Geese and
ordered geese ﬂying in V-shaped pattern. (Author illustration, images from Wikimedia)

4

Ice. As you know, when gaseous or liquid water cools it can form solid ordered crystals of ice.
Figure 1.11 shows water in disordered and ordered states—as steam and ice. As above, use
Table 1.1 and a piece of scratch paper to analyze this system. Then, compare your answers to
those found in Table 1.2 below.

Figure 1.11. Photos illustraing a transition between chaotically distributed water molecules
(steam) and an ordered ice crystal. (Author illustration, images from Wikimedia)
Oil. When heat is applied to disordered ﬂuids like oil, ordered cellular patterns can emerge. You
can observe these when slowly boiling thick liquids in shallow pans. These patterns consist of
ﬂow (convec on) cells that form as hot low-density liquid rises in the center of each cell,
spreads out on the surface, cools, densiﬁes, and then sinks. Figure 1.12 shows two shallow
pools of oil in glass dishes and illustrates the ﬂow that produces convec on cells. Once again,
use Table 1.1 and a piece of scratch paper to analyze this system. Then, compare your answers
to those found in Table 1.2 below.

Figure 1.12. Images illustraing a transition between chaotically distributed oil molecules (le )
and ordered ﬂow (convec on) cells (middle). The image at right illustrates in cross sec on how
ﬂow cells form. (Author illustration, images modiﬁed from Wikimedia)
How did you do? The point of this ac vity was not to get the ‘right answers’. Instead, it was to
provide you with several opportuni es to think deeply about how ordered states self-assemble
from disordered states.

5

As we’ll discover later, many ordered states persist because natural processes oppose each
other. Said diﬀerently, order o en emerges in systems that contain complementary negative
responses—in which the eﬀect of one process opposes a second process and vice-versa. For
example, the ordered state of oil above persists as cooling from above opposes heaing from
below. Likewise, the natural state called a star persists as the inward pull of gravity balances the
opposing outward ‘force’ of mo on.
Interesingly, an ancient prophet understood aspects of this principle (2 Nephi 2). He taught
that ‘law’ and ‘opposition in all things’ are essen al for ‘creation’ and ‘existence’. He described
that opposing laws form the foundation of ‘The Creation’ by which ‘God created all things in
the Heavens and Earth, including every living thing’. This prophet further taught that opposing
processes produce all states—including life and death, that ‘God creates things to act’
(governing processes and agents) and ‘things to be acted upon’ (system parts) and that the very
‘purpose of life and creation’ relies on opposing processes. These teachings provide an
excellent example of the compa bility of revealed and discovered truths. In this case, both
witness that the states of natural systems result from natural law (governing processes).
Our hope for you is that you are beginning to see how lawful self-assembly produces order in
natural systems. Many ﬁnd it astounding that ordered systems as diﬀerent as ﬂocks of geese,
crystals, and stars share so much in common and can be analyzed using a similar tool set. Of
course, the tools we use represent a much simpliﬁed version of those used by professionals in
ﬁelds like physics, gene cs, and evolu onary biology to study the spontaneous emergence of
order. Simpliﬁed though they be, the tools we’ll use represent a 'template of thought' that can
transform your understanding of nature and bless other areas of your life. We hope you choose
to develop this powerful perspec ve.
Answers A n s w e r s
Table 1.2 Completed template for analyzing disordered and ordered states of geese, water, and
oil.

6
Reconciling Lawful Self-Assembly with God's Words 

Having now introduced basic aspects of truth and order, we’re ready to inves gate what God’s
Works and God’s Words indicate regarding The Ongoing Creation of Nature. As we’ll see in the
rest of this book, God’s Works ﬁrmly witness that the order humanity observes in natural
systems spontaneously emerges through lawful interac ons of component parts. However,
many people interpret God’s Words to indicate the opposite—that God created nature through
agent-designed assembly, that God spoke, and the order in nature appeared.
The apparent contradic ons between these witnesses lie at the core of supposed conﬂict
between religion and science. If these contradic ons are real, religion and science are locked in
irreconcilable conﬂict. Signiﬁcantly, those that believe in an unerringly truthful Creator who
authored wri en scripture and every aspect of nature, recognize that real conﬂict between
God’s Words and Works cannot exist, because both record the same creative events.
Before proceeding, we invite you to take a moment to assess your own perspec ves on these
important issues. If you currently lean towards ‘creation by obeyed verbalization or ritual’, you’ll
love the traditional interpretations of the Creation scriptures found below (emphases added),
which seem to clearly indicate that God speaks words or performs rituals that, in fairly short
order, cause ma er to produce ordered systems such as mountains and monkeys.
● “In the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and the Word was God." (John
1)
● “In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth. … And God said … God made …
God said … God called …” (Genesis 1)
● “…I will show thee the workmanship of mine hands… I created these things … the heaven
and the Earth…. And I, God, said … called … made … saw …. I, God, ended my work … I, the
Lord God made the heaven and the earth … every plant … animal … all the children of men
….” (Moses 1-4)
● “…at the beginning … Gods organized and formed the heavens and the Earth … and Gods
said … called … ordered … organized … watched … prepared … formed … counseled together
… saw that they were obeyed…”. (Abraham 4)
On the surface, these verses seem crystal clear: God creates by agent-designed assembly.
Proponents of this view usually envision that The Creation happened quickly a few thousand
years ago by direct interven on of God in a 'poof' or series of ‘poofs’. (To be clear, we're using
'poof' descrip vely, not pejoratively.) These individuals rarely accept that we live in The
Creation today. Instead, they believe that The Creation was a drastically diﬀerent period in the
past. As a result, these individuals usually reject connec ons between the processes that
created nature originally and the processes that presently create and develop natural systems
such as stars, planets, and species. What’s more, these individuals o en believe that natural
order cannot arise spontaneously because they believe that only an agent-Creator (not physical
processes) can form natural order.

7
During the Renaissance humanity began discovering that lawful self-assembly forms the
physical world. These discoveries caused religious fundamentalists to begin searching for
aspects of nature that cannot be explained by natural processes (laws)—an endeavor known
as ‘natural theology’. Through me, humanity has discovered ever-more aspects of nature that
clearly form and develop according to natural law. This has le ever-smaller ‘gaps’ in which an
agent-Creator could operate. For this reason, the God of natural theology has become known
as the ‘God of the Gaps’.
The problem with literal ‘creation by obeyed command’ is that it is wholly inconsistent with
‘nature as it is and was’. That is, it directly contradicts the witness of God's Works. And that’s a
big problem if you, like us, believe that ‘truth is knowledge of things (like nature) as they were,
are, and will be’.
Given these problems and apparent contradic ons, how should scholarly disciples proceed?
Should we toss observations of nature and proceed as fundamentalist religionists? Should we
instead throw out these verses of scripture and proceed as scien ﬁc fundamentalists? Both of
these approaches are unpalatable to scholarly disciples, who consider both God's
Words and God's Works as faithful records of The Creation. Thankfully, ways to reconcile these
witnesses appear as we recognize that wri en scripture is pregnant with teachings that equate
God’s Words or Commands with His Law. For example (emphases added):
● When giving His laws, the Ten Commandments, to Moses, “God spake all these words…”
(Exodus 20).
● “the law … and conditions … were ins tuted before the foundations of the Earth … mine
house is a house of order. I appoint … by law … [and] my word … is my law…” (D&C 132).
The simple calculus that equates God’s Word and God’s Law provides a powerful perspec ve
that can resolve the apparent contradic ons between scien ﬁc and religious interpretations of
The Creation. Consider, for example, the eﬀects of replacing 'word' with ‘law’ in the earlier
verses of scripture:
● ‘In the beginning was the law, and the law was with God, and the law was God.’ (John 1)
● ‘In the beginning God used law to create the heaven and the earth … and law made …’
(Genesis 1)
● ‘I will show thee the workmanship of mine hands … that I used law to make … the heaven
and the earth … every plant … animal … all the children of men ….’ (Moses 1-4)
● ‘… at the beginning … Gods … counseled together … and through law … ordered … organized
… prepared … and formed the heavens and the Earth … and Gods … saw that ma er obeyed
law ….’ (Abraham 4)
If the above readings of these verses seems like cleverly-disguised sophistry aimed to trick you,
consider these suppor ve verses of wri en scripture (emphases added):
● ‘There is a law given unto all things, by which they func on. Their behaviors are ﬁxed … by

8 ● ‘There is a law given unto all things, by which they func on. Their behaviors are ﬁxed … by
the law by which all things are governed, even the power of God. All systems have a
law given … there are many systems … unto every system is given a law. U nto every
law there are certain bounds … and conditions [and these govern the transitions between
system states]’ (D&C 88)
● ‘… all truth or law is independent in that system in which God has placed it, to act for
itself … otherwise there is no existence …’ (D&C 93)
● ‘I, the Lord, am bound … by law, irrevocably decreed … before the foundations of this world
… if law could … be destroyed, God would cease to be God …; ‘and if God changeth ... he
would cease to be God’ (D&C 82 and 130, Alma 42, Mormon 9)
Equaing God's Word and Law emphatically reconciles the witnesses of both God's Words
(wri en scripture) and God's Works (natural scripture) regarding the origins and development
of nature. So, if gods create through natural law, does that make the ‘creation by obeyed
verbalization or ritual’ interpretation false? Well, yes and no. It certainly makes literal ‘creation
by spoken command’ false in any ul mate sense. However, ﬁgurative ‘creation by spoken
command’ remains true because it validly explains God’s relationship to nature and accurately
describes the power of God’s knowledge. Interesingly, these may have been the very no ons
that God was trying to teach us in wri en scripture.
An additional scriptural equivalence—The Father = The Son (John 10, John 14, Ma hew 11,
and Mosiah 15)—provides us with an interesing template for understanding the equivalence
we just explored. In wri en scripture, The Father speaks as if He were The Son, and vice versa.
In addition, we’re taught that meeing The Son is equivalent to meeing The Father. Using the
same pattern of subs tu on from the ‘Father equals Son’ equation with our creation-related
equivalence (namely, God's Words = Laws = Knowledge = Power) makes the following
statements about The Ongoing Creation equivalent:
● God spoke, ma er obeyed, and nature emerged. (This statement describes the literal
witness of God's Words and provides an excellent ﬁgurative explanation of God’s
relationship to nature.)
● God created the physical world by the power of law. Or, God, through law, created the
physical world. (These statements employ the ‘God’s Words are His Law are His Power’
equation found in wri en scripture).
● Law created the physical Universe. Or, natural processes created the physical world. (These
statements describe the literal witness of God's Works, natural scripture).
Now, read the statements in reverse, from bo om to top. In response to the bo ommost
statement, most religious fundamentalists would burst from their pulpits to proclaim,
“Blasphemy! You are dead wrong! God created nature!” Likewise, in response to the
uppermost statement, most scien ﬁc fundamentalist would explode from their laboratories to
proclaim, “Stupidity! You are dead wrong! Natural processes produce nature!” Our witness is
this: Yep, you're both right—except for the stupidity, blasphemy, and ‘dead wrong’ parts. In
other words, we witness that the problem with these extreme perspec ves results from
dogmatically overvaluing favored preparatory knowledge and, as a result, undervaluing

9 dogmatically overvaluing favored preparatory knowledge and, as a result, undervaluing
complementary preparatory knowledge.
Do you, like us, believe that God's Words and God's Works are both faithful records of The
Ongoing Creation and, as such, must tell the same Creation Story (albeit with diﬀerent
purposes)? In addition, do you ﬁnd the conciliatory power of this creation-related equivalence
(God's Words = Laws = Knowledge = Power) as beautifully simple as we do?

A Final Word

If at some point during our exploration you’ve felt a acked, that was not our inten on. To be
clear, we are not trying to force our perspec ves upon you. Instead, we're trying to share
perspec ves that we've found powerfully produc ve. As we see it, our responsibility is to share
what we consider good fruit and your responsibility is to determine the degree to which it is
sweet or ro en. Finding truth is an individual responsibility, and so we wish you happy
evaluation along your con nued journey towards truth.
At this point along that journey, we encourage you to take a moment to consider your present
approach to evaluaing the u lity and truthfulness of human explanations (interpretations). Has
it changed since we began our travels together? Have you experienced a strengthening or
shi ing of your perspec ves regarding the nature, reliability, and meaning of observations and
interpretations, of natural and wri en scripture, of scien ﬁc hypotheses and theories, of …? It
is our sincere desire that you've found a gem, or seven, amongst the ideas we've shared, and
we hope that you carry these gems—or improved versions of them—with you into the
millennia that lie ahead.
Having established an introductory foundation, we now proceed to explore the witness of
nature regarding the development of the Universe, Earth, and Life. Are you excited to begin?
We are.