2.1 GiFreakinNormous! 2. 1 
Exploring Very Small and Very Large Worlds
Dr. Brian Tonks and Dr. Dan Moore, Physics and Geology Departments, BYU-Idaho

Now, … I know that man is nothing, which thing I never had supposed. —Moses

Learning Objectives:
● Understand and be able to identify each of the following: the Universe, planets, planetesimals,
stars, normal stars, giant stars, and mini stars, solar or planetary systems, nebulae, galaxies, galaxy
clusters and galactic voids.
● Use a scale model of the Solar System (the Sun as a 12” ball) to describe 1) the relative sizes of the
Sun, Mercury, Earth, & Jupiter, 2) the distances from the Sun to Mercury, Earth, & Jupiter, 3) the
relative distance between the Sun and other nearby stars, and 4) the size of the Milky Way Galaxy.
● Use a scale model of our galaxy (the Milky Way as a DVD) to identify the relative distance to the
Andromeda galaxy, relative diameters of the largest and smallest galaxies, the size of the Universe
and the distribution of galaxies in the Universe.

The Universe is our cosmic home. It consists of all aspects of the physical world that humans
can interact with or observe. The Universe includes all space, ma er, energy, and governing
laws (natural processes). Signiﬁcantly, the Universe is ‘clumpy’, contains abundant order, and is
Gifreakinormous. It extends inward from the size of your body to objects that are almost too
small to comprehend. The Universe also extends outward to distances that are nearly
unfathomably large.

What’s the Ma er? Inves gating Inner Space

The human scale is where we live our lives and where we develop our intuition about how
nature works. The retro images in Figures 2.1-2.3 (from a 1980’s Scientific American publication
called Powers of Ten) can help you visualize inner space.

Figure 2.1 Photos of order at ‘the human scale’. The central blue squares show the location of
subsequent photos. Each photo is of an area ten mes smaller than the last. As a result, the last
image in the row is 10,000 mes smaller than the ﬁrst. Our familiarity with this scale provides

2 image in the row is 10,000 mes smaller than the ﬁrst. Our familiarity with this scale provides
us with extensive physical intuition. Left to right: a man, hand, and three closeups of the
triangular pattern that makes skin ﬂexible. (Author illustration, images from Wikimedia)
Figure 2.1 illustrates the human scale. As we proceed to smaller scales the nature of reality
become less familiar. The physical intuition of most people—their sense of ‘how things work’—
ends in the last image.

Atomic Scale 

Below the human scale we enter the foreign world of cells, molecules, and atoms. At these
small scales, nature consists of constant, rapid, chaotic mo on. Despite this chaos, order
pervades this realm (Figure 2.2).

Figure 2.2. Photos illustrating the atomic scale. Le to right: A white blood cell, the membrane
surrounding a cell nucleus, coiled DNA molecules, closeup of DNA strands, and individual
atoms in three-pronged molecules. The last image is one billion mes smaller than a human
body. (Author illustration, images from Wikimedia)

Subatomic Scale 

Inside atoms lie the ever-smaller realms of the electron cloud, nucleus, and quarks—the
smallest known objects. Atoms are about ten billion mes smaller than your body, atomic
nuclei are ~100,000 mes smaller than atoms, and quarks are a thousand mes smaller than
nuclei—making quarks a million trillion mes (10-18 m) smaller than your body. As you can see,
order characterizes the physical at even the smallest scales (Figure 2.3).

Figure 2.3. Images illustrating the subatomic scale. Le to right: the fuzzy electron cloud of an
atom and four images of an atomic nucleus. (Author illustration, images from Wikimedia)
Now, look at your hand or a nearby wall and consider what makes these objects ‘solid’. In other
words, why can’t you pass your hand through a wall? Most people believe that material objects

3 words, why can’t you pass your hand through a wall? Most people believe that material objects
are solid because they are ‘full’ of ma er. Although intui ve, this idea is dead wrong. Ma er is
mostly empty space. The ‘stuﬀ’ of ma er—electrons, protons, neutrons, and the like—take up
almost no space. Instead, electromagne c ﬁelds make ma er seem ‘full’.
Li le in our day-to-day experience prepares us to understand the bizarre characteristics of inner
space. For example, it’s easy to describe the weight and mo on of a soccer ball as it ﬂies
towards a goal, but it’s impossible to do the same for atoms. What’s more, electrons and
protons behave both like tiny soccer balls and like waves on a pond—allowing an individual
electron-sized ‘ball’ to enter adjacent goals at the same me.
Impossible, you say? Be careful, it’s true. This example illustrates how scientific understanding
can repair gaps in our physical intuition and provide powerful insight into the nature of physical
reality. In other words, scientific knowledge allows humanity to extend its intuition into inner
and outer space.

What’s Up, Doc? Exploring Outer Space 

Like inner space, the ma er in outer space is clumpy and ordered—but the objects and
distances in outer space are stupendously large.

Our Solar System 
We refer to the objects that orbit stars as planets, planetesimals, or dust. In this simple scheme,
planets are spherical and large (>100 km), dust is irregular and small (<100 m, the length of a
soccer ﬁeld), and planetesimals are in between.
Planets, planetesimals, and dust consist of rocks, ices, liquids, and/or gasses. Planetesimals
made of rock are asteroids, and those made of ice are comets. Solar systems consist of a star(s)
and all the objects and ma er that orbit it. For obvious reasons, solar systems are some mes
called planetary systems.

Figure 2.4. Illustration of our Solar System. Note that most of the ma er resides inside ordered
planets, planetesimals, and star(s). (Wikimedia)

4

Our Solar System consists of one star, eight planets, several dwarf planets, millions of asteroids,
billions of comets, and a li le gas and dust (Figure 2.4). The inner four planets consist mostly of
rock and metal and have thin atmospheres. In contrast, the outer four planets are mostly
hydrogen and helium gas. Most asteroids orbit the Sun between Mars and Jupiter, and the
orbits of most comets lie beyond Neptune (in the Kuiper Belt and beyond).
Our Solar System was ‘without form’ long ago, when it was part of a much larger nebula.
Nebulae are large clouds of gas and dust (Figure 2.5) that can form solar systems when they
become cool enough to collapse.

Figure 2.5. The Crab Nebula, a cloud of gas and dust. (NASA)

Galaxies 

Our star, the Sun, lies at the center of our Solar System. Stars are gaseous objects large enough
to fuse (or have fused) elements in their interiors. Normal stars (called ‘Main Sequence’ by
astronomers) have intermediate sizes and fuse hydrogen in their cores. In contrast, giant stars
fuse hydrogen in shells outside their cores, and dense mini stars result when stars ‘die’. As
normal stars age, they become giant stars and then mini stars.
Galaxies are enormous glowing aggregates of nebulae, stars, and planets held together by
gravity (curvature of space me). As we’ll explore later, galaxies glow by the combined light of
their stars, gas, and dust. Figure 2.6 shows the three types of galaxies. Spiral galaxies consist of
central bulges surrounded by thin, pinwheel-shaped disks. Elliptical galaxies have spherical
shapes in which the stars orbit in all directions. Irregular galaxies result from galactic collisions
that distort the shapes of other galaxies. Most galaxies contain between a hundred million and
several hundred billion stars.

5

Figure 2.6. Photos of spiral, elliptical, and irregular galaxies. (NASA)

The Universe 
At the largest scale, galactic clusters surround huge, nearly empty voids—as shown in Figure
2.7.

Figure 2.7. Images showing the large-scale, sponge-like structure of the Universe. Brightness
indicates the density of galaxies in a region. The second image shows a magniﬁed part of the
ﬁrst. (Kapteyn Ins tute)

Sizes and Distances in the Solar System, Galaxy, and Universe 
Having introduced star systems and galaxies, let’s develop our intuition about the sizes of
astronomical objects and the distances that separate them. To do this, we’ll use three
progressively larger scale models.
As a warmup, let’s compare our bodies to the oceans, the oceans to Earth, and the Earth to
Jupiter, the Sun, and other stars. For reference, Figure 2.8 is a photo of our home planet, Earth.
So, imagine yourself standing on a beach somewhere looking at the ocean. Then, answer this
ques on: How big are the oceans relative to your body? In other words, how many people
could ﬁt into Earth’s ocean basins? Is it the en re population of your city? The population your
country? The population of the world? Commit to an answer by wri ng it down.

6

Figure 2.8. Photo of Earth, highligh ng Africa—the birthplace of humanity. (NASA)
Incredibly, it would take ~80 billion billion adult bodies (80,000,000,000,000,000,000 people) to
ﬁll the oceans. That’s ~10 billion mes the number of people on Earth today. Now, ask yourself
how well your physical intuition extended to the size of the ocean basins. Was your es mate
close? If not, don't stress: very few people can intuit the answer. So, how big are Earth’s oceans
compared to your body? Almost unimaginably larger!
Now, compare the size of the oceans to Earth. Imagine that Earth is the size of a soccer ball. At
this scale, how big would the oceans be? A drop? A cup? A liter? Write down your answer.
Okay, now hold your hand out ﬂat, palm up. Seriously, hold it out. If Earth were the size of a
soccer ball, the oceans would almost ﬁll the low spot in your palm. Now, imagine spreading that
small amount of water over ~70% of the soccer ball. At the scale of planet Earth, the oceans—
which are huge relative to our bodies—form only the thinnest veneer. Earth is BIG!

Figure 2.9. Illustration of the relative sizes of planets and stars. (Modiﬁed from Wikimedia)

7
Figure 2.9. Illustration of the relative sizes of planets and stars. (Modiﬁed from Wikimedia)

Even so, Earth is tiny compared to Jupiter (Figure 2.9), which is tiny compared to the Sun, which
is tiny compared to the star Arcturus, which is tiny compared to the star Antares, which is tiny
compared to the largest known star, VY Canis Majoris. Stated with numbers, Earth is ~1300
mes smaller than Jupiter, which is ~1000 mes smaller than the Sun, which is ~16,000 mes
smaller than Arcturus and ~400 million mes smaller than Antares. What’s more, it would take
more than 9 billion Suns to ﬁll the largest known star, VY Canis Major.
Well, that was exci ng. Although it’s diﬃcult to understand how how large planets and stars
are, the distances that separate them are even larger. To explore this reality, let’s imagine that
the Sun were size of a ball.
Scale Model 1: The Sun as a Ball
If we made the Sun ~4.6 billion mes smaller than it is, it would be the size of a 12” ball (30.5
cm; ~25% larger than a soccer ball). At this scale, Earth and Venus would be the size of
peppercorns and Jupiter and Saturn would be the size of ping-pong balls. With those sizes in
your head, es mate the scale-model distances from the Sun to Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars,
Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto. Write at least a few of your es mates down.
Table 2.1. Scale-model sizes, distances, and locations for our Solar System

Figure 2.10. Satellite image of the BYU-Idaho campus illustrating the scale model of our solar
system. (Author illustration, map from Google Earth)

8

Now, compare the distances you recorded to those listed in Table 2.1 and shown in Figure 2.10.
Then, spend a few minutes studying this scale model—or recreate it in a location familiar to
you, using the distances in the table and the ruler feature in a map tool like Google Earth.
Besides making the Solar System sensible, this model can help us visualize the distances
between stars. So using this model, how far away would you place the next star/solar system? A
few miles? …? Write down your answer.
Remarkably, the next star/solar system would lie more than 5500 miles (8800 km) away, near
the Eiﬀel Tower (Figure 2.11). Are you surprised? Most people are. Outer space is
tremendously vast... and mostly empty.

Figure 2.11. Illustration showing the scaled distance between neighboring solar systems.
(Author illustration, map from Wikimedia)
Scale Model 2: The Sun as a Candy Sprinkle
Helpful as the Sun-as-a-ball model is, we need a new model to understand larger galactic
distances. Figure 2.12 illustrates our new scale model, in which the Sun is the size of a candy
sprinkle (~0.02 in or 0.5 mm). In this model, the Solar System is the size of your palm (4.3 in or
11 cm) and ~4 soccer ﬁelds (0.25 mi or 0.4 km) separate neighboring stars.

Figure 2.12. Images illustrating the sun-as-candy-sprinkle scale model. Le : The relative size of
a star (green dot, enlarged for visibility) and solar system (palm). Right: The scale distance
between adjacent solar systems (palms enlarged for visibility). (Author Illustration; palm image
from Wikimedia; ﬁeld from Unsplash).
In real life, our galaxy is over 100,000 light years wide and contains ~200 billion stars. (We’ll
help you understand light years be er later. For now, realize that light travels ~670 million miles
per hour, so it covers a lot of ground in a light year.) In our star-as-a-candy-sprinkle model, stars

9
per hour, so it covers a lot of ground in a light year.) In our star-as-a-candy-sprinkle model, stars
are located about four soccer (football) ﬁelds apart. Take a moment to es mate the size of the
Milky Way galaxy in this model.
At this scale, our galaxy would be ~5,000 miles (~8,000 km) wide—nearly twice as wide as
North America (Figure 2.13). This model makes the size of our galaxy more comprehensible,
but not the number of stars. To do that, es mate the volume that 200 billion candy sprinkles
would occupy. Would they ﬁll a bucket? a car? a bedroom? ... ?

Figure 2.13. Image showing the scaled size of the Milky Way Galaxy relative to North America.
The green dot, which lies above BYU-Idaho also shows the location of our star, the Sun, in the
Milky Way. (Author illustration, images from Wikimedia)
If you can believe it, two hundred billion candy sprinkles would ﬁll the fifteen extra-large yellow
school buses shown in Figure 2.14. Kind of boggles the mind, doesn't it?

Figure 2.14. Images of the fifteen school buses required to house 200 billion candy sprinkles.
(Wikimedia)
By the way, 200 billion is also a reasonable es mate for the number of galaxies in the Universe.
So, the Universe contains about 200 billion me 200 billion stars, or
~40,000,000,000,000,000,000,000 or ~10 22 stars . Um... that's a big number. How many candy
sprinkles is that? Enough to cover North America from the Arc c to Panama about one soccer
(football) ﬁeld deep. Is it any wonder that God described the number of ‘worlds’ to Moses as
'without number'? Remember, Moses lived in a culture where even a small number like 1,000
usually meant 'lots and lots', not '999 + 1'.

10
Scale Model 3: Our Galaxy as a DVD
If you thought the objects and distances we’ve already explored were large, think again. The
distances between galaxies in the Universe are much larger. To develop intuition about these
distances, we need a third scale model. In this case, we’ll shrink our 100,000-light-year-wide
galaxy to the size of a DVD. At this scale, the smallest galaxies (~100,000 stars) are the size of
‘BB’, and the largest galaxies (about a trillion stars) are the size of a DVD.

Figure 2.15. Images showing the scale-model sizes of galaxies: BBs (0.2 in or 5 mm) for small
galaxies, DVDs (5 in or 13 cm) for large galaxies, and merry go rounds (8 feet or 2.5 m) for the
largest galaxies. (Images from Wikimedia)
At this scale, distances between neighboring galaxies lie up to ~80 feet apart. But don't let
these scale distances fool you, they are huge in real life. For example, a model distance of only 8
feet separates our galaxy from Andromeda—but this distance is ~2.5 million light years in real
life!
Now for the ﬁnal push towards the largest physical scale—the size of the Universe. In real life,
the Universe is ~90 billion light years ‘across’. This translates to a galaxy-as-DVD distance of ~70
miles (113 km). Using this model, the Universe is a stretchy sphere ~70 miles across containing
several hundred billion BB- to merry-go-round-sized galaxies forming the sponge-like pattern
shown in Figure 2.7.

Stranger Things 
As with inner space, some a ributes of outer space are mind-bending. Chief among these is the
stretchiness of durations and distances. Most people consider that space and me are constant.
Sadly for the physical intuition of most people, this is false. Space and me are not constant,
they are stretchy. Rapid mo on and ultradense objects slow the passage of me and shrink
distances. Although counterintui ve, it’s true.
The stretchiness of space me means that a million years can pass on Earth while just a few
seconds passes elsewhere in the universe (say near a neutron star). What’s more, there are
places in the Universe where me stops and distances shrink to zero. A consciousness near a
place like this could describe the passage of me as ‘an eternal now’ and the vastness of space
as ‘all things are present before me’.

11

Well, that’s ativery short introduction to our Universe. As you have seen, the physical Universe is
Gifreakinormous. The Universe is about a billion billion billion billion billion mes larger (~10 45)
than the smallest bits of ma er, quarks. To say that quarks are tiny or that the Universe is huge
are gross understatements. In fact, it is almost impossible for humanity to comprehend the
vastness of nature. What’s more, order pervades nature at every scale—from atoms to
organisms and from planets to galaxies. The exploration of this order—in the Universe, Earth,
and Life—will guide the rest of our journey together.