
2.2 Brighter & Brighter, Un l The Perfect Day 2. 2 
What Light Can Teach Us and How We Learn It
Dr. Brian Tonks and Dr. Dan Moore, Physics and Geology Departments, BYU-Idaho

Twinkle, twinkle li le star, how I wonder what you are. —Nursery rhyme

Learning Objectives:
● Understand and be able to identify each of the following: wavelength, amplitude, color, brightness,
spectrum (continuous, emission, absorp on), position of astronomical objects, parallax, Doppler
eﬀect, and blueshi and redshi .
● Understand what the distance of an object indicates about the age of the light observed by
humanity.
● Illustrate how important scientific interpretations about the universe, stars, etc. derive from
scientific observations of the position, color, spectrum and brightness of astronomical objects using
the following examples:
○ How astronomers interpret stellar temperatures from observations of star color.
○ How astronomers interpret distances to astronomical objects from observations of
parallax and by comparing the true and apparent brightness of an object.
○ How astronomers interpret the elemental composition of astronomical objects from
observations of their spectra.
○ How astronomers interpret the mo on of astronomical objects (away from, towards, or
rotation) from observations of the blue-shi or red-shi of their spectra.

Earlier, we encouraged you to distinguish between observations and interpretations. This
chapter will help, by answering this ques on: How do scien sts use observations to explain
objects like stars?
As you know, the Universe consists of gas, dust, nebulae, stars, planets, and galaxies. Most of
these are too far away for humanity to visit. So, how does humanity study these distant ordered
systems? Light! Instead of us going to them, we use the light that comes from them to us. This
light brings humanity invaluable information. But what is light?

Important Proper es of Light 

Light is a self-propagating electromagne c wave (Figure 2.16) that travels at a constant speed
through space (at 300,000 km/s or ~670 million mph). Energy distinguishes diﬀerent ‘types’ of
light (Figure 2.17). The energy of light relates to its wavelength—the distance between the tops
of waves (Figures 2.16 and 2.17). For example, visible light has intermediate energy and
wavelength (Figure 2.17).

2

Figure 2.16. Illustration showing how light self-propagates, as a changing magne c ﬁeld
generates a changing electric ﬁeld and vice-versa. (Wikimedia)
Ma er can emit, absorb, or reﬂect light. The brightness of this light depends on its intensity
(energy per unit area), wave height height (amplitude), or abundance of light waves. In
contrast, the color of material objects results from the wavelengths of light they emit or reﬂect.
The light given oﬀ by most objects is a mixture of diﬀerent wavelengths (colors). For example,
white light consists of all wavelengths of visible light (Figure 2.17-2.18). In contrast, colored
light consists of mostly speciﬁc wavelengths, like those corresponding to the color green.

Figure 2.17. The full electromagne c spectrum, with each type of light labeled. (Modiﬁed from
Shu erstock)
When the component wavelengths of light separate, they produce spectra—a kind of ‘rainbow’.
Figure 2.18 shows the three types of spectra. Continuous spectra consist of all colors, without
any breaks. Hot objects like light bulbs produce continuous spectra. Absorp on spectra are
continuous spectra from which speciﬁc wavelengths of light have been par ally or completely
removed by absorp on. Stars produce absorp on spectra. Emission spectra consist only of light
at speciﬁc wavelengths. Hot nebulae produce emission spectra. Emission and absorp on
spectra are complementary. The dark lines in absorp on spectra are equivalent to the bright
lines in emission spectra.

3

Figure 2.18. Illustrations of spectra. Le : Image showing white light separating inside a prism to
produce a spectrum, the colored waves at right. Right: The three types of spectra. (Author
illustration, images modiﬁed from Wikimedia)
Observing Distant Objects
Before proceeding, take a moment to study the image of the night sky in Figure 2.19. As you
do, consider what a ributes distinguish one object from another. Interestingly, just four
a ributes distinguish these distant luminous objects—color, position, apparent brightness, and
spectrum. Below, we provide examples that illustrate how humanity uses these observations to
learn about distant objects.

Figure 2.19. A Hubble Telescope photo of the night sky. (NASA)

Observing Color, Interpreting Temperature 

If you had to choose, which would you rather touch, the steel where it is black in Figure 2.20 or
the part that is yellow-orange? If you chose black, you likely understand the that the colors
represent diﬀerent temperatures—black is coolest, then red, orange, and yellow.

4

Figure 2.20. Hot steel, showing the relationship between temperature and color. (Wikimedia)
Stars, like steel, are made of ma er, and all hot ma er glows. Hot objects glow with shorter
wavelength light. For example, a warm object may glow dominantly in the infrared, whereas
ho er objects glow in higher energy visible or ultraviolet light. Astronomers rou nely use color
(spectrum) to interpret the surface temperature of stars. On the ‘cool’ end, the surfaces of red
stars are only ~6000 °F. Orange, yellow, and white stars have progressively ho er temperatures.
The ho est stars are blue. Their surfaces are commonly ~70,000 °F and can reach ~400,000 °F.
What’s more, some mini stars have ini al surface temperatures of a trillion degrees. Thus, even
‘cool’ stars have hot surfaces, and the exterior of the ho est stars are unimaginably toasty.

Observing and Interpreting Position and Brightness 

When you ﬂip the switch, light seems to ﬁll the room instantaneously. This is nearly true
because light travels really fast. In fact, several billionths of a second pass as the light travels
from the bulb to your eyes. Because light travels so far so fast, it provides a useful method for
measuring the stupendously large distances between objects in the Universe. So, instead of
describing the distances between two objects in miles (or km), humanity has learned to use the
amount of me required for light to travel that distance.
Using this method to measure distances from Earth, it is 8.3 light minutes to the Sun, ~4 light
years to the nearest stars, and ~2.5 million light years to the nearest large galaxy (Andromeda).
Of course, this means that the light we see from the Sun le its surface 8.3 minutes ago. As a
result, ground-based humans can never see what is happening on the Sun or any other object in
space ‘right now’. What we see always shows past events.
In this way, the distance to an object determines the age of the light we observe. In other
words, the greater the distance to the object, the farther in its past we observe the object. For
example, the light we observe from a galaxy that is 200 million light years away shows us that
galaxy as it was 200 million years ago when the light we see le the galaxy. Said diﬀerently, we
cannot see objects as they are now. Rather, we see them as they were when the light was
emi ed. This is a powerfully cool reality, for it allows humanity to use our sense of sight to
directly observe some past events.
Now, let’s learn how humanity uses position and brightness to determine the distances to
objects.

5
Observing Position, Interpreting Distance
To understand on way that astronomers use position to interpret distance, perform this
experiment:
● Look at a distant object with one eye shut, and then place your thumb at arms length
directly under the object you selected.
● Then, switch eyes and no ce that your thumb appeared to move. This apparent movement
is called parallax.
● Now, pull your thumb closer, repeat the experiment, and no ce that the parallax is larger
than before.
This experiment illustrates that the distance to nearby objects determines the observed
parallax—the ‘degree of apparent shi ’ of objects viewed from diﬀerent perspectives. Figure
2.21 illustrates how astronomers use parallax to measure the distances to stars.

Figure 2.21. Illustration showing how a nearby red star appears to shi position (relative to
distant blue, orange, and yellow stars) when viewed from diﬀerent perspectives—Earth’s
location in January and July. This apparent shi (parallax) records the distance to red star.
(Author illustration)
Interestingly, the Sun-centered model of the Universe predicted that humanity should observe
the parallax of stars. Although humanity began searching for parallax in the 1600s, it remained
unobserved un l the early 1800s because early telescopes were too weak. In the intervening
years, some used humanity’s inability to observe parallax as evidence that Earth did not orbit
the Sun. This historical episode illustrates the importance of pa ence and wisdom as we search
for truth.
Today, modern instruments allows scien sts to measure parallax with incredible precision. For
example, observing the smallest parallax humanity can observe is equivalent to observing the
thickness of a hair from nearly 600 miles away.
Observing Brightness, Interpreting Distance
Useful as it is, parallax can only determine distances for objects within ~10,000 light years of

6 Useful as it is, parallax can only determine distances for objects within ~10,000 light years of
Earth, which isn’t very far. Thankfully, brightness measurements can be used to determine the
distance to even very far oﬀ objects. These measurements rely on so-called standard candles,
objects that shine with known true brightness (the actual brightness or luminosity of a star).
Figure 2.22 illustrates how the apparent brightness of an object (the brightness we observe
from Earth) diminishes as distance grows. This relationship—the apparent dimming of objects
with distance—is described by a precise mathema cal relation. Astronomers use this equation
to determine the distances to ‘standard candles’ like Type-1A supernovae or Cepheid variable
stars .

Figure 2.22. Illustration showing the relationship between true and apparent brightness. All the
stars and candles in the image have the same true brightness, but the distant objects appear
dimmer. (Author illustration)
Once again we see how primary observations (in this case apparent brightness) produce
knowledge of a ributes (like distance) that we cannot measure directly. Approaches such as
these allow humanity to learn about distant objects that are too far away to visit. What’s more,
knowledge of these a ributes provides humanity with the information needed to develop
detailed explanations (scientific hypotheses and theories) for how these distant objects form,
function, and develop. Doing astronomy involves some pre y cool detective work, doesn’t it?!

Observing and Interpreting Spectra 

Like brightnesses, spectra contain abundant information. In the early 1800s, humanity began
productively using continuous, emission, and absorp on spectra (Figure 2.18) to learn about
the nature of distant objects. As you already know, the colors (continuous spectra) of hot
objects records their surface temperatures. In addition, emission and absorp on spectra can
record both the composition and mo on of far-away objects.
Observing Spectra, Interpreting Composition
Have you ever seen the color of a stove ﬂame change from blue to yellow when ma er from a
boiling pot fell into the ﬂame? Situations like this illustrate a simple truth—light can record
composition. Ma er interacts with light through its electrons, and each type of atom (element)
has a unique set of electrons. Thus, when the electrons in an element emit or absorb light, they

7 has a unique set of electrons. Thus, when the electrons in an element emit or absorb light, they
do so at unique wavelengths. These spectral lines identify the element that produced them. As
a result, light emi ed or absorbed by atoms in objects iden ﬁes the composition of those
objects, as illustrated in Figure 2.23. Incredible as it may seem, light from across the Universe
records the types and abundances of atoms with which it interacted.

Figure 2.23. Illustration showing how spectral lines record composition. (Author illustration,
spectra from Wikimedia)
Observing Spectra, Interpreting Mo on
In addition to recording composition, spectra can record mo on. Have you listened as a train or
ambulance approached and then passed you? If so, recall that the pitch (wavelength of sound)
lowered as it passed. This shi in pitch is known as the Doppler eﬀect. It records the vehicle’s
speed and direction of movement. In the same way, wavelength shi s in spectral lines record
the mo on of stars and galaxies. Pre y incredible, isn’t it? The light that travels from distant
objects carries with it information about their mo on.

Figure 2.24. Illustration showing how spectral lines record the mo on (direction and speed) of
distant objects. Le : Image and explanation of the Doppler eﬀect of moving light sources.
Right: Hydrogen emission spectra from objects that are stationary (top), receding (redshi ed),
and approaching (blueshi ed) relative to Earth. (Author illustration, images from Wikimedia)
Figure 2.24 illustrates how relative mo on causes spectral wavelengths to shi . No ce how

8 Figure 2.24 illustrates how relative mo on causes spectral wavelengths to shi . No ce how
approaching light sources shorten wavelengths, shi ing them towards the blue (shorter
wavelength) end of the visible spectrum. Likewise, recognize that retreating objects shi
wavelengths towards the red end of the spectrum. These shi s are known as blueshi and
redshi , respectively.

Would you ever have imagined that light could be used to learn so many, many things about
distant objects such as stars and galaxies? Remarkably, we've only barely scratched the surface.
As we move forward, we'll explore what humanity has learned about how ordered systems such
as stars and planets form, function, and develop. We encourage you to remember that the
explanations we’ll encounter are based on abundant observations.