
2.3 A Star Is Born 2. 3 
How Nature Produces Order in Stars
Dr. Brian Tonks and Dr. Dan Moore, Physics and Geology Departments, BYU-Idaho

Nature is pleased with simplicity. And nature is no dummy. —Isaac Newton
Learning Objectives:
● Understand and be able to identify each of the following: normal stars, mini stars, nebulae,
globules, proplyds, and nuclear fusion.
● Analyze the birth of stars in terms of governing processes and system states separated by
transitions; speciﬁcally, how gravity and fusion produce the normal star state from a globule in a
nebula.
● Describe how a change in one of the following proper es of a normal star will aﬀect the other
proper es: mass/gravity, fusion rate, true brightness, and temperature (all of which are
propor onal to each other); and life me (which is inversely propor onal to the other proper es).

The enormous and enormously hot sphere of glowing ma er shown in Figure 2.25 is the Sun.
Did you know that the Sun is a normal star? Stars present humanity with many interesting and
important ques ons to explore. These include: Are stars eternal or do they form, change
through me, and eventually ‘die’? Do stars result from natural or supernatural processes?
When and how did our star form? Do stars and planets form together or separately? How
certain is humanity’s scientific understanding of stars? In addition to being fascinating in their
own right, the answers to these ques ons can help us understand how order forms in nature.

Figure 2.25. Photograph showing the dynamic surface of our normal star, the Sun. (NASA)

2

Forming Stars from Nebulae 

On human mescales, stars take ativery long me to form. For this reason humanity has never
observed the en re birth process of a star. Instead, humanity has observed numerous stars at
diﬀerent stages of formation and development. Based on these observations and our
understanding of the laws that govern nature, humanity has developed an extensively-tested
scientific explanation that describes how stars and planets form. This scientific theory (nebular
theory) successfully explains the observed a ributes of nebulae; normal, giant, and mini stars;
and planets.
From Nebula to Proplyd
Nebulae are huge, highly disordered, thin clouds of mostly hydrogen (92%) and helium (8%) gas,
plus a li le rock, metal, and ice dust. written scripture refers to nebulae as ‘ma er
unorganized’. In contrast to chaotic nebulae, stars are highly ordered systems. The ma er in
them is concentrated and layered. Stars are born in nebulae. So, how does stellar order emerge
from nebular chaos?
Inside nebulae, two processes oppose each other: gravity and gas pressure. The curvature of
space me produces gravity, which is strongest where ma er is most densely concentrated. In
contrast, gas pressure results from the mo on-induced collisions of gas par cles. Gas pressure
strengthens as temperature increases. Gravity increases the density and temperature of
nebulae as it pulls ma er together, and gas pressure lowers nebular density and temperature as
it pushes ma er apart. In the absence of gas pressure nebular collapse would proceed with
li le resistance. What’s more, in the absence of gravity gas pressure would disperse nebulae.
The ‘tug of war’ between gravity and mo on (gas pressure) governs the formation,
development, and death of stars. Compe on between these governing processes can be
dynamic. When one process dominates, nebulae can contract or expand for a me. However,
one-sided dominance rapidly wanes because the dominating processes increases the strength
of the opposing process. In this way, mo on provides the ‘ying’ to gravity’s ‘yang’, and vice-
versa. When imbalanced, lawful interactions between gravity and mo on can cause ordered
stars to lapse into chaotic transitions. In contrast, balanced interactions produce long stages in
which li le appears to change. For example, the ‘normal star’ stage is a period when vigorous
ac vity between strenuously opposed gravity and mo on produces li le moment-to-moment
change.
Cool nebulae make ideal stellar nurseries because the gas pressure in them is low. Gravitational
collapse inside such nebulae begins when suﬃciently dense regions develop. Within a
collapsing nebula, inward-pulling gravity overpowers outward-pushing gas pressure because the
increasing density produced by the collapse continuously strengthens gravity. In this way,
collapse increases density, which increases gravity, which increases density,… in a self-sustaining
cascade that continuously shrinks each collapsing por on of the nebula. Individual nebulae can

3
cascade that continuously shrinks each collapsing por on of the nebula. Individual nebulae can
contain thousands of these collapsing globules. Each globule can produce a solar system.
Although uniform globules collapse to form only a central star, most collapsing globules are
clumpy. In these globules, gravitational pull causes the shrinking globule to spin. This rotation
accelerates as collapse proceeds, just like a ﬁgure skater that pulls limbs inward. Spinning
globules eventually ﬂa en into a central bulge and surrounding disk, much like a blob of pizza
dough ﬂa ens when spun overhead. Eventually, the central bulge becomes a star, and planets
form in the surrounding protoplanetary disk (proplyd for short). More on planet formation
later. Figure 2.26 shows a collapsing globule and the proplyd it produces.

Figure 2.26. Cartoons showing the early stages of solar system formation—in which a proplyd
forms from a collapsing globule. Most of the material in the proplyd becomes part of the
growing central star. Proplyd collapse and mo on produce the polar ou low jets. (Author
illustration)
Fusion Fuels Stars and Makes New Ma er
During the extended period of gravitational dominance that drives globule collapse, ever
increasing density produces ever higher pressures and temperatures. This causes atomic nuclei
to collide with increasing energy, and these collisions increasingly resist gravitational collapse.
When rising temperatures at the dense center of the globule reach ~15 million degrees,
collisions become suﬃciently intense to overcome proton-proton repulsion, and nuclear
par cles fuse. This process, called nuclear fusion, forms elements with heavier nuclei by joining
lighter nuclei.
In the cores of normal stars, individual protons of hydrogen nuclei combine to form helium
nuclei. In this process ~1% of the ma er (m, mass) becomes a tremendous amount of energy
(E). Einstein’s famous equation, E=mc 2, expresses this conversion (c is the speed of light and c 2
is about 10 billion). This equation is an incredibly concise and quan tatively precise way to
communicate these truths: energy and mass (ma er) are diﬀerent forms of the same thing,
ma er is tremendously condensed energy, and converting even minuscule amounts of mass
produces huge amounts of energy.
The energy produced during fusion fuels stars like our Sun. In case you’re interested, the
energy that produces sunlight takes ~100,000 years to reach the Sun’s surface and another 8.3
minutes to reach your skin. So the next me you no ce the Sun, contemplate that journey and
consider expressing gra tude for the annihilated ma er that produces its light. Energy from the

4 consider expressing gra tude for the annihilated ma er that produces its light. Energy from the
Sun has played an essen al role in Earth’s habitability since our solar system formed ~4.5 billion
years ago, and thankfully the Sun has suﬃcient nuclear fuel to con nue warming Earth’s surface
for another ~5 billion years.
Inside the Forming Star
Those things aside, let’s deepen our understanding of star formation by focusing once again on
the collapsing proplyd. Recall that gravitational collapse inside the central bulge produces the
ever-higher temperatures and pressures that eventually fuse atomic nuclei. The ini ation of
fusion marks the beginning of the transition that produces a normal star. If the central bulge is
too small and cold to initiate fusion, no star forms. Instead, the collapsing bulge produces a
brown dwarf, a kind of huge Jupiter.
In bulges that produce stars, the energy released by early fusion rapidly increases gas pressure
in the core. This causes the star to expand explosively. As this expansion proceeds, decreasing
temperature and gas pressure cause fusion to cease. Eventually, diminishing temperature and
gas pressure allow collapse to begin again, which repeats the earlier steps. In this way,
opposition between gravity and fusion-generated gas pressure produce ever-dampening
sequences of collapse, fusion, expansion, cooling, collapse, and so on. Eventually, balance
develops between gravity and gas pressure and the chaotic transition initiated by fusion gives
way to a new, stable state. We call this state a normal star.
Of course, other factors such as the in-falling of ma er from the nebula aﬀect this process. Even
so, opposition between gravity and fusion ensure eventual stability. Did you catch that
important idea? Opposition between gravity and fusion-fueled gas pressure ensure that,
eventually, a stable normal star will emerge from the cyclic instabilities associated with star
birth. Said another way, gravity and fusion govern the production of the ordered normal-star
state from the disordered globule state. Said a fourth way, natural processes cause ordered stars
to spontaneously emerge from chaotic nebula.
This reality is also expressed in written scripture. Said an ancient prophet, ‘there can be no
creation—no stars, no Earth, no humans—without lawful opposition’ (2 Nephi 2). And so it is.
As we con nue our journey together, we’ll discover that lawful self-assembly produces all
ordered natural states—from dogs to diamonds and planets to primates. Before proceeding, we
invite you to pause and ponder this profound perspective.
How Normal Stars Form and Develop
So, now you know: all normal stars, including the Sun, are continuous nuclear explosions
contained by the balanced inward pull of gravity. What’s more, collapsing globules become
normal stars when stellar fusion stabilizes and die when lack of fuel causes fusion to cease.
Figure 2.27 illustrates the sequence of states and transitions that produce normal stars from
nebulae. Relative to the life mes of normal stars (which extend from a few hundred thousand
to trillions of years), the transition from disordered nebulae to ordered normal stars is relatively

5 to trillions of years), the transition from disordered nebulae to ordered normal stars is relatively
short. On average, the transition from globule collapse to stable hydrogen fusion occupies just
~0.1% of a star’s life me.

Figure 2.27. Illustrations showing the states (images) and transitions (arrows) that produce
normal stars from nebulae. (Author illustration; nebula and Sun images from NASA)
Mass Determines Behavior
The amount of ma er in stars determines most stellar characteristics, including the nature and
magnitude of opposing forces during star birth, life, and ‘death’. For example, mass increases
‘gravitational pull’ (space me curvature), which increases the rates of stellar fusion and fuel
consump on, which in turn produces ho er stars that live shorter ‘lives’. For these reasons,
high-mass stars are ho er, more blue, and live shorter lives than their low-mass counterparts,
which are cooler, more red, and live longer lives.
To those unfamiliar with stars, this inverse relationship between mass and life me can appear
counterintui ve. For example, intuition can suggest that massive stars should live longer lives
because they have more fuel. Understanding that massive stars burn fuel much faster than low-
mass stars resolves this apparent discrepancy.
Mass also aﬀects the size and brightness of normal stars. Both size and brightness result from
emergent balances between energy produced in stellar cores and energy radiated from stellar
surfaces. When radiated energy exceeds fusion, stars shrink and dim. Conversely, when interior
energy exceeds radiated energy, rising temperature causes stars to expand and brighten. For
this reason, high-mass stars are brighter and larger than low-mass stars.
As you can see, mass determines the nature of normal stars by controlling the dynamic
equilibrium between gravity and gas pressure.

Observational Evidence 

Humanity’s ever-expanding ability to make telescopic and other observations provide numerous
opportunities to test humanity’s scientific understanding of star formation and development.
Signiﬁcantly, these observational tests have been able to falsify nebular theory. As a result,
humanity has tremendous conﬁdence in the theory. Said diﬀerently, although there are many
details to explore, the basic processes that create stars and planets are ﬁrmly established.

6
Figure 2.28 shows two nebulae where stars and their planetary systems are currently forming.
The Orion Nebula lies ~1350 light years from Earth, is ~25 light years across, and represents the
largest nearby star-forming region. Importantly, nebular theory predicted the shapes, ages, and
other characteristics of Orion’s proplyds long before humanity could photograph them. In
addition to their beauty, recognize that these images are actual photographs of stars and solar
systems in the process of forming.
The Eagle Nebula lies ~7000 light years from Earth and likewise contains thousands of forming
solar systems. Energe c, newly-formed stars have blown away much of the original gas.
However, in places like the ‘Pillars of Creation’, newly forming solar systems protect spires of
gas in much the same way as a shadow protects frost from the Sun.

Figure 2.28. Upper. Photographs of nebulae and proplyds. (NASA)
Isn’t it amazing to live when humanity is able to directly observe the formation of new stars,
planets, and species?! (More on planets and species later.) Right now, in The Ongoing Creation
in which we live, God is ‘pouring out knowledge about the physical world’, including through
those who dedicate their lives to studying ‘things above the Earth and beneath the Earth’
(Daniel 12, John 16, D&C 88).
Before proceeding, consider what learning about stars has taught you about science. Do you
believe that scientific discoveries are inspired? Do you believe that science is moving humanity
towards an ever-more-correct understanding of how nature formed, developed, and functions?
How would you characterize your perspective? Are you eagerly commi ed to scientific
discoveries? interested but distrus ul? purposefully indiﬀerent? disdainfully dismissive? or
something else entirely? Typically, your a tude as a disciple toward scientific scholarship is a
keen indicator of your commitment to using physical reality (observation) as an essen al test
for explanations of nature (interpretation).