2.4 Dancing With The Stars!
Transitions in The Life Cycles Of Stars
Dr. Brian Tonks and Dr. Dan Moore, Physics and Geology Departments, BYU-Idaho

We are to admit no more causes of natural things than such as are both true and suﬃcient to
explain their appearances. —Isaac Newton

Learning Objec ves:
● Understand and be able to iden fy each of the following: low-mass stars (<8 mes the Sun’s mass),
intermediate-mass stars (8-20 mes the Sun’s mass), high-mass stars (>20 mes the Sun’s mass),
white dwarf stars, neutron stars, black holes, radioac ve isotopes, stable isotopes, and half-lives.
● Describe the roles of gravity and gas pressure (from fusion or collapse) in the stability of normal
stars and in the transitions between normal, giant, and mini stars. Also, describe the response of
stars (e.g., a temperature or size change) to the exhaus on of a fuel supply (ﬁrst hydrogen fuel, then
helium fuel, …).
● Describe the states and transitions that comprise the life cycle of low-, intermediate- and high-mass
stars using terms such as gravity, fusion, size (diameter), temperature, gas pressure, balance,
collapse, and expansion. Also, understand where most heavy elements form.

To better understand how humanity discovered the life cycles of stars, imagine you’re an alien
tasked with determining the life cycle of humans. You bring with you the advanced knowledge
and instruments of your civilization, but you must complete the task in one day without
communicating with a human. Since one day doesn’t allow you to observe even a small fraction
of one human life cycle, what will you do? How will you complete your task? Give it some
thought before proceeding.
One approach would be to make observations of trends in human a ributes—like height,
weight, and time on task. If you collected such data, observations would demonstrate that
humans spend ~1/3 of their time unconscious, ~1/3 working, and ~1/8 preparing and
consuming nourishment. You would also discover that small beings called ‘babies’ can do little
themselves and large ‘adults’ are fully independent. In addition, you could use height-weight
correlations to determine that the smallest humans (‘babies’) make up 2% of humanity,
‘toddlers’ 4%, ‘children’ 7%, ‘teenagers’ 7%, and ‘adults’ comprise 80% of humans. Combining
these and other data, you could determine that humans are born as small dependent ‘babies’
and grow through other stages to ‘adulthood’ where their independence peaks, as illustrated in
Figure 2.29.
Interestingly, humanity is in the same situation as the hypothe cal alien. Human history is far
too short to observe even the smallest por on of a star’s life cycle. However, like the imagined

2
too short to observe even the smallest por on of a star’s life cycle. However, like the imagined
alien, humanity has been able to determine the life cycles of stars by observing the a ributes of
numerous stars. Two stellar a ributes—surface temperature and brightness (luminosity)—
played essen al roles in helping humanity discover how stars form, develop, and ‘die’. In the
early 1900s astronomers used these a ributes to discover that all stars pass through similar
states and transitions, as illustrated by the arrows in Figure 2.30.

Figure 2.29. Illustrations showing the life cycles of humans and stars. (modiﬁed from
Wikimedia).

Figure 2.30. The so-called ‘H-R diagram’ of surface temperature versus brightness (luminosity).
Arrows show the life cycle of a low-mass star like the Sun. (Modiﬁed from Wikimedia)

Life Cycles of Stars

Recall that normal stars begin as cool nebulae and become normal stars when fusion of
hydrogen in their cores stabilizes. When normal stars run out of hydrogen fuel in their cores,
they pass through a transition and become giant stars, which fuse hydrogen outside their cores.
Depending on their mass, giant stars can pass through additional transitions. Each of these
transitions results from exhaus on of a successively heavier fuel source. Then when fusion
ﬁnally ceases in their cores, giant stars pass through the ﬁnal transition (‘death’) and become

3
ﬁnally ceases in their cores, giant stars pass through the ﬁnal transition (‘death’) and become
mini stars and nebulae.
Figure 2.31 illustrates the enduring states and rapid transitions that comprise stellar life cycles.
As you can see, stars of diﬀerent mass follow somewhat diﬀerent developmental paths. For
example, low-mass stars like the Sun form white dwarfs while high-mass stars produce black
holes. Despite these diﬀerences, all stars form from and produce nebulae. This process is known
as the gas-star-gas cycle. The atoms inside you and the objects around you have been through
this process many mes. Truly, your body is made of ‘star stuﬀ’.

Figure 2.31. The states and transitions that comprise the life cycles of stars, according to their
masses. Take note of the mass range that determines the life cycles of low-, intermediate-, and
high-mass stars. (Adapted from Earth Blog)
As for normal stars, balance between gravity and opposing processes like gas pressure produces
the stability that characterizes the giant and mini star states. Likewise, transitions between
these states result when signiﬁcant imbalances develop. During transitions where outward-
pushing forces dominate gravity, stars expand or explode. In contrast, stars collapse during
transition dominated by gravity. The increasing temperature and pressure that accompanies
star collapse can produce the conditions necessary to fuse heavier elements. When collapse
can no longer ini ate fusion, giant stars become mini stars (and nebulae).
Nearly all stars (~99%) have low masses (up to ~8 solar masses). Like our Sun, these lightweight
stars form slowly, live long lives, and die in relatively quiescent transitions that produce nebulae
and white dwarfs. Figure 2.32 uses our star to illustrate the life cycles of low-mass stars. The
Sun formed from a collapsing globule ~4.57 billion years ago, and it contains suﬃcient hydrogen
fuel to persist as a normal star for another ~5.4 billions years. When it runs out of fuel, it will

4
fuel to persist as a normal star for another ~5.4 billions years. When it runs out of fuel, it will
spend ~120 million years as a giant star, and then it will become a nebula with a central white
dwarf.

Figure 2.32. The life cycle of our star, the Sun. (Wikimedia)
In contrast, heavyweight stars form quickly, live short lives, and die in huge explosions called
supernovae. The short energe c lives of these stars produce strong ‘winds’ that disperse the
nebulae that form around them. In addition, supernovae produce neutron stars and black
holes, which are some of the most bizarre objects in the Universe.

Giant Stars

Giant stars are 10-100 mes wider and have cooler, redder surfaces than normal stars.
Importantly, giant stars are the nurseries of nearly all heavy atoms. These stars fuse hydrogen
to helium in a shell outside their cores and can fuse helium and other heavy elements in their
cores and inner shells.
Forming Giant Stars
All stars result from transitions that involve collapse. For example, collapsing globules form
normal stars, shrinking normal stars produce giant stars, and collapsing giant stars make mini
stars. As normal stars age, slowly diminishing gas pressure causes them to shrink. In response,
rising temperature and fusion rate increase stellar temperature and brightness. Today, for
example, the Sun is ~30% brighter than when it formed.
Near the end of their lives, the cores of normal stars become choked with fused helium. These
inert helium cores cool and shrink as hydrogen fusion ceases. In turn, interior pressures and
temperatures increase. Giant stars emerge from these transitions when rising temperature
ignites hydrogen fusion in shell around the core.
Star Death, ReDeath, and Final Death
So, giant stars are born when normal stars die. What’s more, giant stars can experience many
such deaths themselves, as they exhaust successive fuel sources. The ﬁnal death of a giant star
occurs when core fusion ceases. During giant star states, low-mass stars like Aldebaran produce
only light elements, while massive stars like Antares produce heavier elements (Figures
2.30-31).

5

Stars persist in the giant star state for ~10% of their total ‘lifespan’. In giant stars with many
transitions, the periods between transitions progressively shorten. For example, a normal star
25 mes more massive than the Sun fuses hydrogen in its core for ~2.5 million years. Then
during the giant star stage the star burns heavier elements in its core and shells. Speciﬁcally, it
fuses helium and hydrogen for a few hundred thousand years; carbon, helium, and hydrogen for
a few hundred years; oxygen and lighter elements for a few years; neon and light elements for
about a year; and silicon and lighter elements for about one day. Silicon fusion produces iron.
But iron fusion consumes instead of produces energy, so the produc on of iron halts stellar
fusion.
In this way, high-mass giant stars generate the elements from helium to iron. Near the end of
their lives, fusion in massive giant stars occurs in shells that surround a growing inert core of
iron. Once silicon fusion ceases, the star dies—explosively.

Final Death

The matter in normal stars is ghtly packed and strongly held. In contrast, giant stars are so
large that they hold onto surface matter very weakly. As a result, stars gently shed at least half
of their matter (mass) during the giant star state. This matter slowly produces nebulae. For low-
mass stars, this gentle shedding con nues through the ﬁnal death of the star. In this way, low-
mass stars gently transition into central white dwarfs and surrounding nebulae. In contrast,
intermediate- and high-mass stars go out with a bang. During these supernovae, previously-
shed nebulae are swept up by catastrophic explosions.
Hot glowing nebulae can be hauntingly beau ful, as illustrated in Figure 2.33. The intricate
shapes of speciﬁc nebulae result from the events that produced them. At the center of each
nebula lies a mini star.

Figure 2.33. Photos of nebulae and mini stars produced as giant stars died. The central ny dot
at the center of the Ring Nebula is a white dwarf. The Sun will look something like this ~5 billion
years from now. (NASA)
Humanity has directly observed several dozen supernovae since the ﬁrst recorded event in 185

6 Humanity has directly observed several dozen supernovae since the ﬁrst recorded event in 185
AD. For example, in 1054 Chinese and Native American observers recorded the supernova that
produced the Crab Nebula and central neutron star (Figure 2.5). Of course, the actual explosion
occurred in 5,469 BC (because the Crab Nebula lies 6,523 light years from Earth). Since that
me, the Crab Nebula has expanded by ~400 km/s (~900 mi/hr). Today the nebula is ~6 light
years across.

Mini Stars

Mini stars emerge from the cores of giant stars. This transition happens relatively smoothly for
low-mass stars and explosively for intermediate- and high-mass stars. When the inert iron cores
of massive stars reach cri cal mass (~1.4 solar masses), the core and interior layers collapse
catastrophically to form an incompressible core made of neutrons. Eventually, the collapsing
outer layers collide with the incompressible core. Depending on mass, this collision turns the
core into a neutron star or black hole. Outside the core, the rebounding outer layers ignite to
form an explosion of mind-boggling violence. Supernovae are the largest ‘atomic bombs’
imaginable. They are the most extreme explosions in the Universe, and they last less than a
second.
Supernovae produce temperatures up to about one billion degrees and release vast quan es
of energy. In fact, supernovae usually release more energy than that released during the en re
life time of stars. The energy of supernovae produces stupendously violent nuclear collisions.
These collisions generate all the elements heavier than iron that exist in nature. Without
supernovae elements like lead, pla num, and gold would not exist.
Atom-forming processes inside stars and supernovae produce nuclei with many combinations
of protons and neutrons. Each combination is called an isotope. Some combinations are
unstable and others are stable. Unstable isotopes spontaneously break apart in a process called
radioac ve decay. When radioac ve isotopes decay they eventually produce stable isotopes,
which do not decay.
Radioac ve decay is a lawful process that can record the passage of me. Highly unstable
radioac ve isotopes decay quickly, while less unstable isotopes decay slowly. The rate of
radioac ve decay is o en expressed as a half-life, the time required for half the radioac ve
atoms in a specimen to decay. (More about radioac ve decay later.)
As we’ll discover later, most hydrogen and helium formed with the Universe. Later, numerous
generations of stars produced the rest of elements. For these reasons, atoms represent
important chapters of natural scripture. From these chapters, those with eyes to see can learn
important truths about the history of the ongoing creation of nature.
White Dwarf Stars
White dwarfs are the carbon-rich cores of low-mass stars (up to ~8 solar masses). These mini
stars are excep onally dense. Although their mass is similar to that of the Sun, their volume is

7
stars are excep onally dense. Although their mass is similar to that of the Sun, their volume is
similar to that of Earth. Thus, a tennis-ball-sized chunk of white dwarf matter would weigh as
much as ~30 cars.
New white dwarfs can be ho er than 100,000 degrees and glow blue-white. However, they are
not very bright because they are so small. Over me, white dwarfs cool, change color, and
eventually stop glowing altogether. In this sense, white dwarfs are like the dying embers of a
ﬁre, they glow but do not burn.
Neutron Stars
When stars with intermediate-masses (~8-20 solar masses) ‘go supernova’, they produce
neutron stars and nebulae. These explosions not only blow material away from the star, they
also blow it into the star. These extreme implosions ‘squish’ the empty space from atoms,
making neutron stars about as wide as a city (~10 miles across) and a billion mes more dense
than white dwarfs. Expressed another way, the density of neutron stars is equivalent to
squishing the matter from all the people on Earth into a small marble.
The discovery of neutron stars is an excellent example of the predic ve power of scien ﬁc
theories. Astronomers predicted the existence of neutron stars in the early 1930s. However, it
took more than three decades of telescope improvements before humanity ﬁrst observed a
neutron star. Today, after more than half a century of additional observations, the existence of
neutron stars remains unfalsiﬁed.
Are you impressed that scien ﬁc theories can accurately predict never-before-observed aspects
of nature solely because the theory says they should exist? The observed predic ons of
scien ﬁc theories signiﬁcantly increase humanity’s conﬁdence in the validity of these theories
because true predic ons are a hallmark of true explanations.
Black Holes
The implosions produced during the supernovae of high-mass stars (greater than ~20 solar
masses) overcome the extreme strength of neutrons. In the process, they produce the smallest,
densest objects in the Universe. We call these stellar remnants black holes because not even
light can escape the tremendously warped space time that surrounds them.
Black holes can be diﬃcult to understand. To help, let’s compare space time to a trampoline that
dimples when weighed down by a massive object like a steel sphere. In this 2D analogy, a black
hole can be thought of as an ultra-dense object that curves trampoline so extremely that the
sides of the depression touch, forming a sac-like container.
Although it is impossible to use light to see inside black holes, we can use the external eﬀects of
black holes to explore their nature—in the way that you could discover what’s inside a sealed
paper sac by probing it from the outside. Figure 2.34 shows humanity’s ﬁrst photograph of a
black hole. Incredible as it seems, mounting observations of black holes support their existence.

8

Figure 2.34. 2019 photograph of the super-massive black hole at the center of galaxy M87,
surrounded by light produced by infalling gas. (NASA)
As you have seen, the ordered nature and development of stars emerges spontaneously from
lawful interactions between governing processes like gravity and gas pressure. Pre y cool, isn’t
it?! What’s more, the development of stars forms an important waypoint on our journey From
Atoms to Humans. For without stars the atoms needed to make your body and Earth would not
exist.