2.5 Round and Round The Mulberry Bush
How Solar System Order Emerges
Dr. Brian Tonks and Dr. Dan Moore, Physics and Geology Departments, BYU-Idaho

The Bible shows the way to go to heaven, not the way the heavens go. —Galileo Galilei

Learning Objec ves:
● Understand the meaning of accre on and illustrate how it builds planetary bodies (planets, moons,
and planetesimals) from metal, rock, ice, and gas.
● Describe the nature and origin of these types of order in the Solar System: 1) The concentration of
matter in the Sun and planetary bodies; 2) The distribution of materials like rock, metal, and ice
with distance from the Sun; 3) The direc ons of planetary orbit and spin; and 4) The clustered ages
of the oldest solids in the Solar System.
● Describe how our Planetary/Solar System formed from a nebula in terms of lawful self-assembly
using terms such as nebula, orbit, gravity, temperature, gas, dust, rock, metal, ice, accre on,
proplyd, planet, planetesimals, planetary body, ini al state, transition, and ﬁnal state.

The Solar System includes all the planets, moons, asteroids, comets, dust, and gas that orbits
our star, the Sun. Numerous ancient astronomically-aligned structures witness that humanity
began exploring the Solar System long before the Space Age began in the mid-1900s. In
addition to sa sfying curiosity, these cultures tracked objects across the night sky for navigation
marking the ming of the seasons and social events. In the 1600s astronomers used the ﬁrst
telescopes to observe night-sky objects that humans had never before seen, like Jupiter’s larger
moons.
Later, inspired discoveries helped humanity understand the natural processes that govern
planetary motion. By the mid-1900s astronomers had developed a well-tested theory (nebular
theory) for the formation of planets and planetary systems. However, un l robo c space probes
were invented in the 1960s, detailed observations of most Solar System objects remained
impossible. These spacecra greatly expanded human understanding of the Solar System.
What’s more, modern telescopes can iden fy the a ributes of planets that orbit nearby stars.
Using these data, humanity con nues to test nebular theory and to unravel the nature and
history of planets and planetary systems.
Like their central stars, the abundant order in planetary systems results from lawful interactions
between component parts. This order includes important patterns in the composition, motion,
and ages of planetary objects. Without this order our Solar System would be an uninhabitable
cloud of gas and dust.

2
Our Ordered Solar System

Matter in the Solar System is highly concentrated. Most of this matter is in the Sun (~99.9%),
and essen ally all the rest resides in planetary bodies (Figure 2.35). Concentrating matter in
this way leaves most of the Solar System empty. In fact, the space between planets is so vast
and empty that traveling from Earth to Venus in a speeding car would take thousands of years,
and during that journey you would encounter a trillion fewer atoms than are in your eyeball.

Figure 2.35. Illustration of our Solar System’s star and major planetary bodies. Because the
distances between these bodies are so great, it would be impossible to take an actual
photograph of our Solar System that shows both its width and the planets. (Wikimedia)
The Sun consists of 92% hydrogen and ~8% helium. It is a huge sphere of plasma, surrounded
by a little gas. In contrast, planets, asteroids, and comets consist mostly of solids, liquids, and
gases dominated by elements heavier than helium. The types of solids—rock, metal, and ice—
and the relative abundance of gas vary with distance from the Sun. For example, the planetary
bodies of the inner Solar System consist mostly of rock and metal, with relatively little liquid
and gas. Figure 2.36 shows the terrestrial planet Mars, which has a metal core, rocky mantle
and crust, polar ice, and thin atmosphere and plasma sheath.

3

Figure 2.36. Mars, showing its rocky surface, polar ice, and thin atmosphere. Note how ghtly
planets concentrate matter. (NASA)
In contrast, planetary bodies in the outer Solar System contain far greater propor ons of gas
and ice. Gas giant planets like Jupiter and Saturn consist mostly of hydrogen and helium gas and
have relatively small cores of rock and metal (Figure 2.37). Beyond the gas giants, the comets
consist mostly of water, carbon dioxide, and similar ice. Comets contain minor dust and
essen ally no liquid (Figure 2.38) .

Figure 2.37. Jupiter, showing the famous ‘Great Red Spot’. (NASA)

Figure 2.38. The 1997 passage of the comet Hale-Bopp. The ‘tails’ represent matter blasted
from the comet’s surface. (Col Drusciè Observatory)

4

Ordered Motion
Most planetary bodies in the Solar System orbit and spin in the same direc on, and most share
the same orbital plane (Figure 2.39). In addition, most of the rotational motion (angular
momentum) in the Solar System lies in planetary bodies rather than in the Sun, which contains
most of the matter. In other words, the Sun rotates relatively slowly, but the planets orbit at
tremendous speeds. For example, Mercury orbits the Sun at ~100,000 miles per hour, and its
year lasts just 88 Earth days.

Figure 2.39. Illustration showing the ordered orbits and spins of Solar System planets.
(Wikimedia)
Ordered Ages
The ages of the oldest Solar System materials form another important pattern. Instead of
having uniformly young or randomly distributed formation ages, all the oldest known materials
formed during the same early period, ~4.5 billion years ago. These consistently ancient ages
witness that the en re Solar System originated together, long ago.

How Planets Form in Proplyds

Many people interpret written scripture to mean that God creates like a chef in a kitchen,
through agent-designed assembly. In contrast, natural scripture witnesses that God creates
through natural processes. As already discussed, appropriately deep respect for both sources of
truth can reconcile the apparent conﬂict.
The natural processes that govern the formation of planets include gravity and motion. These
processes produce collisions Inside proplyds that concentrate matter in a process called
accre on. Signiﬁcantly, gravity and motion inside proplyds explain all the ordered planetary
patterns described above.

5

Gravity and Motion
As you already know, natural processes can produce order from chaos. Earlier, we explored how
gravity and motion produce the ordered nature of stars. Gravity and motion also create the
ordered nature of planets and their systems—as illustrated in Figure 2.40. However, in
planetary systems gravity opposes orbital motion—not the chao c motion that produces gas
pressure in stars.

Figure 2.40. Illustration showing the main processes (colored lines), states (images), and
transitions (gaps) that form planets in the disks of gas and dust that surround forming stars. In
the proplyd image, note the central star, surrounding disk, wispy streams of infalling gas, and
linear jets of ejected material. (Author illustration; nebula image from NASA, solar system
diagram from Wikimedia)
Recall that ﬂat proplyds form from rotating clumpy globules inside nebulae, in much the same
way that globs of pizza dough ﬂa en when spun overhead. In the disk por on of proplyds, gas
and dust rotate in one direc on around the center (Figure 2.36). This motion prevents gas and
dust in the disk from joining the central star. What’s more, this shared orbital motion explains
why solar systems are ‘ﬂat’ and contain planetary bodies that originally orbit and spin in the
same direc on. Of course, subsequent gravitational interactions and collisions can alter the
orbit and spin of planetary bodies.
Accre on
Nebulae and their collapsing globules consist mostly of hydrogen and helium gas. The
remaining elements typically comprise less than 1% of nebulae. Of these, oxygen, carbon,
nitrogen, silicon, magnesium, and iron are the most abundant. These elements are ~10 mes
more abundant than elements like calcium, aluminum, sodium, potassium, and nickel, which in
turn are more abundant than elements like aluminum and sulfur. The rest of the elements—
including gold and uranium—are vanishingly rare.
Oxygen, carbon, and nitrogen can combine with hydrogen and with each other to form
molecules like water (H 2 O) and carbon dioxide (CO 2). At most temperatures, these elements
and compounds form gases and liquids. They can only form solids (ices) where temperatures
are very low. In contrast iron forms metal, and silicon, magnesium, and iron make rock. Rock

6 are very low. In contrast iron forms metal, and silicon, magnesium, and iron make rock. Rock
and metal exist as solids and liquids at very high temperatures.
The gas and dust in nebulae are spread out. As globule collapse proceeds, gravity forces gas and
dust into ever-smaller spaces, which increases temperature. This compression and heating
accelerate as matter falling from the larger nebula con nues ‘slamming into’ the shrinking
globule. These elevated temperatures vaporize most dust grains in proplyds, and for a time they
prevent new ones from forming.
Later, after the supply of material from the larger nebula slows and the proplyd stabilizes, the
disk cools and new solid grains form. Of course, temperatures near the center of the disk
remain relatively high. As a result, rock and metal solids form throughout the disk, but solid ices
form only in the outer disk where temperatures are low. In our Solar System, the isotopic
compositions of these ﬁrst solids indicate they formed 4.567 billion years ago, less than 30
million years before Earth and the other planets formed.
Today, planets made mostly of rock and metal lie near the sun, those with abundant gases lie
further out, and those consisting mostly of ices occupy the farthest reaches of the Solar System.
As you can see, this pattern results from the original distribution of solids in the cooling disk,
rock and metal toward the center and ice toward the edge.
As these small solid grains accumulated in the disk, gentle encounters allowed them to s ck
together, in much the same way that ‘dust balls’ form behind cabinets or under your bed. As
these ‘dust clumps’ grew, increasing ‘gravitational pull’ accelerated their growth. In me, small
agglomerations grew into pebble-sized solids and then into ﬁst- and boulder-sized bodies—
eventually producing small protoplanets. The process of forming ever-larger solid bodies by
‘gravitational a raction’ and collision of smaller bodies is called accre on. The a ributes of
planetary bodies in our Solar System witness they formed by accre on.
Figure 2.41 illustrates the transition that produces planetary systems from proplyds. Accre on
begins after cooling produces the ﬁrst solids, ramps up as larger bodies grow, and then slows
when the intense ‘winds’ associated with star birth disperse most of the gas and dust that
remains. In this way accre on concentrates matter into planetary bodies, and star birth clears
the huge spaces between planets of intervening gas and dust—producing the Solar System we
observe today.
Although star and planet formation is long compared to blink-of-an-eye human life mes, solar
systems form very quickly relative to the life mes of their stars and planets. In our Solar
System, the Sun and all planetary bodies formed between 4.54 and 4.567 billion years ago. As
you can see, this developmental period—just tens of millions of years long—is minuscule
relative to the ~10-billion-year normal-star-life time and the essen ally eternal white-dwarf-
life time of our solar system. Moreover, this narrow developmental period explains why the ages
of the oldest materials in the Solar System—including those on Earth—cluster towards 4.54
billion years old.

7

Figure 2.41. Cartoons showing the orbits of small grains inside a proplyd (le ) and the orbits of
the planets formed by accre on (right). (Author illustration)
The beau ful illustration in Figure 2.42 shows a planetary system in the process of forming. The
scien ﬁc theory that explains how planets form from nebulae (nebular theory) explains much
more than the ordered nature of matter, motions, and ages in our Solar System. For example, it
explains how gas giants and rocky planets form. Speciﬁcally, abundant ice allows gas giants like
Jupiter to quickly grow large, so large that they retain their primi ve hydrogen-helium
atmospheres when the intense ‘star birth’ winds begin to blow. In contrast, the lack of ice
causes rocky bodies like Earth to remain small during this period.

Figure 2.42. Illustration of planets forming inside a proplyd. Note the ‘empty trackways’ where
accre on is concentrating matter into planets. (Author illustration)
Nebular theory also explains how planet-forming processes produced the miniature planetary
systems that surround Jupiter and Saturn, how Jupiter’s gravitational inﬂuence prevented a
planet from forming in the asteroid belt, why comets only rarely formed larger planetary
bodies, and on and on and on. In fact, humanity has yet to make an observation that falsiﬁes
nebular theory.
You live in an exciting me. Humans today are able to test nebular theory with a rapidly
growing set of new observations. These include numerous observations of other planetary
systems, including many that are presently forming (Figure 2.43). What’s more, the evidence
that you live in The Ongoing Creation of our own solar system is all around you. For example,
the ‘shooting stars’ you see streaking across the night sky are sand-sized grain that are just now
being accreted to Earth. Thankfully, modern accre on is vastly less energe c than it was 4.54
billion years ago when Earth formed.

8

Figure 2.43. Photos of proplyds in which planets are presently forming. Note at right the ‘empty
orbital rings’ where planets have ‘swept up’ disk matter around the young star TW Hydrae.
(ESO)
The success of nebular theory in describing the observed a ributes of solar systems
demonstrates that the theory contains abundant truth. Like all scien ﬁc theories, it blesses
humanity by bringing together many otherwise unrelated observations and by guiding new
discoveries. Of course, if future observations demonstrate that nebular theory has limited
explanatory power, it will s ll have been humanity’s shortest path to greater truth. For this
reason, scholarly disciples hold nebular theory and other scien ﬁc theories in very high regard
—not as absolute truths, but as diamonds in the rough that, through con nuous improvement
and development, will one day produce gemstones in a crown of perfect knowledge.
The formation of our Solar System represents another signiﬁcant waypoint in our journey From
Atoms to Humans. after all, the formation of Earth provided the materials and processes that
converted our long-uninhabitable planet into the comfy place that today we call home.

