2.6 In A Galaxy Far, Far Away
How Order Emerges in Galaxies
Dr. Brian Tonks and Dr. Dan Moore, Physics & Geology Departments, BYU-Idaho

Order is Heaven's ﬁrst law. —Alexander Pope

Learning Objec ves:
● Understand the nature of and be able to iden fy spiral, irregular, and ellip cal galaxies.
● Describe the ‘clumpy’ nature of matter in the Universe—how matter is concentrated in nebulae,
stars, and planetary bodies; how these objects are concentrated in galaxies; and how galaxies are
concentrated around vast regions of nearly empty space.
● Understand how galaxy type, size, composition and complexity have evolved through me.

Having explored how natural processes produce the order found in stars and planets, we turn
our a en on to the order found in galaxies and in the Universe. Galaxies are massive glowing
aggregates of nebulae, planetary systems, and stars held together by gravitational interactions.
Humanity ﬁrst discovered galaxies in the early 1900s. More recently, we’ve come to understand
their organized nature and development. Today, galaxies con nue to amaze—for example by
illuminating the nature of matter and the early history of the Universe.

How Humanity Discovered Galaxies

Far from a city on a clear night you can see a broad band of light that stretches dominantly
across the night sky. The Greeks and Romans called this band the milky circle or way. Using a
rudimentary telescope, Galileo demonstrated that the Milky Way contains numerous stars.
Shortly after this discovery, astronomers found fuzzy patches of light outside the Milky Way.
Scien sts debated the nature of these fuzzy patches for many years. Most astronomers thought
they were clouds of glowing gas, but Immanuel Kant believed they were vast star systems
separated from the Milky Way by enormous distances. Unfortunately, the primi ve telescopes
of the day were unable to diﬀeren ate between these competing hypotheses. So the ques on
remained unanswered. Were these objects nearby gas clouds or distant ‘island star systems’ like
the Milky Way?
As telescopes improved in the 1700s and 1800s, astronomers iden ﬁed more of these fuzzy
objects. Although improved imaging began revealing spiral and other shapes, observations like
emission spectra seemed to indicate that the fuzzy patches were nearby clouds of gas. With the
debate apparently se led, most astronomers in the 1800s accepted that the Universe consisted
en rely of the Milky Way.

2

Then in 1924, distance measurements made by Edwin Hubble demonstrated that some of
these now-not-so-fuzzy objects lay far outside the Milky Way, that they were the ‘island star
systems’ that today we call galaxies. So, how did scien sts in 1800s ‘misiden fy’ these fuzzy
objects?
The problem was one that some mes plagues early inves gations: both hypotheses were right.
The ‘fuzzy objects’ were in fact two en rely diﬀerent classes of objects—nearby clouds and
distant galaxies. So, the misstep involved allowing the correct iden ﬁcation of nearby nebulae
to obscure the reality of distant galaxies. Thankfully, Hubble’s observations clariﬁed the
oversight. This episode in the history of science illustrates how scien ﬁc knowledge develops
from less-true preparatory truths, to more-true preparatory truths in a reﬁning process that
God’s Words succinctly refer to as the ‘line upon line’ accumulation of human knowledge.
Hubble’s discovery of galaxies revolutionized humanity’s understanding of the Universe. Recall
that the early western world believed in a puny solar-system-sized Universe and a Creator with
very few creations indeed. after falsifying that model, humanity believed that the Universe was
about the size of our galaxy. Hubble’s discovery demonstrated that the Milky Way is just one of
a vast number of galaxies in a Universe that is almost unimaginably large.
Figure 2.44 shows a modern image of the nearest large galaxy. Modern telescopic observations
show that Andromeda lies ~2.5 million light years away and is on a collision course with the
Milky Way. But don’t be concerned. These galaxies pass through each other and then merge
~4.5 billion years from now—not long before the Sun transitions into a giant star.

Figure 2.44. A modern photograph of the Andromeda Galaxy (M31)—the 31st ‘fuzzy object’
iden ﬁed by Messier in the 1700s. (NASA)

Order in Galaxies and the Universe

As you know, the interplay between processes that concentrate and disperse matter have made

3
As you know, the interplay between processes that concentrate and disperse matter have made
the natural world clumpy at all scales. At the galac c and universal scales, the lawful curvature
of space time (gravity) concentrates matter and motion disperses it. These opposing processes
prevent the Universe from being a single gas cloud or an ultramassive black hole.
Galac c Order
When some people look at galaxies they see more-or-less solid objects. This op cal illusion
results in part from Earth-calibrated intuition and in part from the hazy appearance of galaxies.
This hazy appearance results from light passing through gas, in the same way headlights make
fog appear ‘solid’. In reality, galaxies—like almost everything—are mostly empty space. The
objects that comprise galaxies—nebulae, planets, and normal, giant, and mini stars—ﬁll only
the smallest fraction of galac c space. What’s more, the space between galaxies contains
almost no matter.
In addition to being ordered themselves, galac c objects move in ordered ways. These
movements generate patterns that distinguish each galaxy type—spirals, ellip cals, and
irregulars (Figure 2.6). The development of galaxies through time also forms an important
aspect of galac c order.
Order in Spiral Galaxies
When most people think of galaxies, they think of cap vatingly beau ful spirals like those in
Figure 2.45. Spiral galaxies consist of a disk, central bulge, and halo. The disk is the thin, ﬂat,
gas-and-dust-rich por on of the galaxy containing the prominent spiral arms. Abundant hot
young stars make the disk bluish.

Figure 2.45. Photos of normal and barred spiral galaxies. Note the yellowish central bulges and
the bluish spiral arms. (NASA)
As matter in the disk sweeps around the central bulge, it forms a spiral pattern of alternating
compressed and expanded regions. Compression in spiral arms triggers nebular collapse and
produces the bright, bluish stars that make spiral arms bright. In contrast, decompression
between arms diminishes star formation and makes these regions darker. Although less bright,
the regions between spiral arms do not contain less matter.
In normal spirals, central bulges are spherical. In contrast, the bulges are cigar-shaped in barred
spirals. Bulges consist of older, more-closely-spaced stars and contain few nebulae. For this

4 spirals. Bulges consist of older, more-closely-spaced stars and contain few nebulae. For this
reason, central bulges are typically bright and yellow-red.
Galac c halos are spherical regions that surround galaxies. Halos contain very little gas and
dust. For this reason, they are diﬃcult to see in photographs and contain very few young stars.
The distribution of spiral arms and the shapes of central bulges can change as galaxies develop.
For example, normal spirals can become barred spirals, and vice-versa. Even so, galaxies change
very slowly. Even a single orbit around a galaxy requires a vast period of me.

Figure 2.46. Diagram of the Milky Way. Note the location of our Solar System. (Wikimedia)
Our galaxy, the Milky Way, is a relatively large barred spiral (Figure 2.46). The disk of the Milky
Way is ~100,000 light-years across and ~1,000 light-years thick, giving it the propor ons of a
DVD. Our galaxy contains several hundred billion stars. Our Solar System orbits the center of
the galaxy at tremendous speed (~514,000 miles per hour) and completes successive
revolutions every ~250 million Earth years. As a result, Earth is just 18 galac c years old.
Our nearest galac c neighbors are dwarf galaxies like Segue 1, which contains only ~600,000
ancient stars. The Milky Way is pulling these galaxies towards it. Today, they lie tens to
hundreds of light-years away. As they approach, they will be distorted by and then merge with
the Milky Way.
Although most galaxies begin as small spirals, collisions can cause spirals to form irregular

5 Although most galaxies begin as small spirals, collisions can cause spirals to form irregular
galaxies. In turn, irregulars typically transition into ellip cal galaxies.
Order in Irregular Galaxies
Galaxies grow through galac c mergers. Most frequently, small galaxies become distorted as
they merge into large galaxies. Where merging galaxies have similar sizes, both are distorted.
Small or large, distor on produces irregular galaxies like those in Figure 2.47. In addition to
altering shape, galac c collisions can compress nebulae and trigger enormous bursts of star
formation, which concentrates gas in stars.

Figure 2.47. Photos of irregular galaxies. Can you see how their shapes allow humanity to
interpret their history and predict their future? (NASA)
Galac c collisions are more like cloud mergers than automobile crashes because the distances
between objects in galaxies are so large. The shapes of large galaxies rarely change signiﬁcantly
when they consume small galaxies. Our own galaxy has ‘consumed’ many such small galaxies,
and it will ‘soon’ consume two more—the nearby Small and Large Magellanic Clouds.
When large galaxies merge they produce irregular galaxies that eventually become ellip cal
galaxies. The images in Figure 2.48 simulate this pattern for the merger of our galaxy with the
larger Andromeda galaxy. If you like both ballet and astronomy, you’ll enjoy watching
simulations of this collision (which you can ﬁnd on the Internet).

6

Figure 2.48. Images showing how Earth’s night sky will change as the collision of the Milky Way
and Andromeda galaxies generate an irregular galaxy (upper-right and lower-le ) and then an
ellip cal galaxy (lower-right). (Wikimedia)
Order in Ellip cal Galaxies
In ellip cal galaxies, stars orbit the galac c center in all direc ons. These orbits form cloud-like,
nearly featureless galaxies with spherical or football shapes, like the ellip cal galaxy in Figure
2.49. Ellip cal galaxies consist mostly of small, old, yellowish stars. They contain little free gas.
As men oned, observations indicate that ellip cal galaxies are the stable remnants of galac c
collisions.

Figure 2.49. Photo of an ellip cal galaxy. (NASA)
Ordered Development of Galaxies
Recall that telescopes are ‘ time machines’. The more distantly humanity looks, the farther back
in time we look. In this way, we can directly observe the nature of galaxies and the Universe
through me. So, nearby galaxies teach us about the a ributes of modern galaxies, and the
most distant galaxies help us understand the nature of the recently-formed galaxies.
Figure 2.50 shows the Hubble Ultra Deep Field. As of this writing, it is the deepest visible light

7 Figure 2.50 shows the Hubble Ultra Deep Field. As of this writing, it is the deepest visible light
photograph of the Universe ever taken by humanity. As you can see, the earliest galaxies in the
image are small and poorly formed. Images like these show that spiral galaxies dominated the
early universe. Today ellip cal galaxies are more abundant than spirals. Observations like these
indicate that galaxies have changed through me.
Mul ple lines of evidence indicate that early galaxies were small, simple, more-commonly
spiral, and contained almost no heavy elements. As time passed, galaxies became more
complex. For example, collisions increased their sizes and the abundance of ellip cal galaxies. In
addition, the gas-star-gas cycle increased the abundance of heavy elements through me. As a
result, modern galaxies are larger, more complex, more-commonly ellip cal, and contain more
heavy elements.

Figure 2.50. The Hubble Ultra Deep Field image (le ). This image contains ~10,000 galaxies.
The numbers correspond to the enlarged photos of distant galaxies shortly after they formed
(right). These ancient galaxies are deeply red because their spectra are strongly redshifted.
(NASA)
Order in the Universe
In addition to the internal and developmental order displayed by galaxies, the distribution of
galaxies in the Universe forms the ordered sponge-like pattern illustrated in Figures 2.7 and
2.51. As you can see, galaxies and galaxy clusters are concentrated around vast regions of nearly
empty space.

8

Figure 2.51. Images showing the large- and ﬁne-scale distribution of galaxies in the Universe.
Voids are shown by black (top) and white (bo om). (Wikimedia)
Are you surprised that the distribution of galaxies is ‘clumpy’? We suspect not.

Clearly, many aspects of galaxies are well understood. Other aspects are not. For example, the
detailed origin of galaxies is not presently explained by well-tested hypotheses. Today,
competing hypotheses are being tested with great vigor. You can expect some exciting and
insightful, perhaps even revolutionary, developments in your life me. Isn’t that exciting?! You
live in a time of con nued inspired discovery.
Well, will you ever look at or think about galaxies in the same way again? The next time you
look at a galaxy, you might take a moment to consider the nearly innumerable planets that orbit
its star. Or maybe you’ll think about the billions of years that passed while the light from that
galaxy traveled to your eyes. Or perhaps ….
