2.7 Before The Bang
How Humanity Discovered The Big Bang
Dr. Brian Tonks and Dr. Dan Moore, Physics and Geology Departments, BYU-Idaho

The history of astronomy is a history of receding horizons. —Edwin Powell Hubble

Learning Objectives:
● Understand how Western Civilization perceived the Universe before Copernicus, between
Copernicus and Newton, between Newton and Hubble, and today.
● Describe what Hubble’s law is and whether it implies that galaxies are moving through the Universe
or being carried by an expanding Universe.
● Describe whether or not the concepts of ‘center’ and ‘edge’ apply to the Universe.

The scientific theory that explains the nature and development of the Universe is called big
bang theory. This theory proposes that the Universe began as an incredibly small, dense, hot
en ty containing all energy, matter, and space me. Big bang theory does not propose that the
Universe emerged from nothing. In fact, it is not a theory about the origin of the Universe. It is
a theory about the development of the Universe. It explains how expansion, cooling, and
complexifying produced the present Universe.
Big bang theory, like other scientific theories, is a dynamically evolving explanation that
develops as humanity makes new discoveries. To date, observations have failed to falsify this
theory. Of course, new observations could do just that. That is, new observations could
demonstrate the limits of its explanatory power and thereby disqualify it as a candidate for
absolute truth. Today big bang theory is humanity’s leading explanation for the nature and
development of the Universe.
So, how did humanity discover the ‘Grand Stretch’ or ‘Great Expansion’ that we call the ‘Big
Bang’?

Universes of Misunderstanding

Aristotle, who lived in 4th-century-BC Greece, developed an Earth-Centered Theory of the
Universe. This Universe was ny, ﬁnite, unchanging, and eternal. During the Middle Ages, as
Greek and Roman ideas mixed with Chris anity, the Earth-Centered Universe became
unassailable religious dogma. This dogma c approach s ﬂed the search for truth. Nearly 2000
years separate Aristotle’s proposal of an Earth-centered Universe from the eventual acceptance
of a more-true, Sun-centered model in the 1600s and 1700s.

2
The eventual rejec on of Earth-centered falsehoods resulted largely from the work of
Copernicus, a Polish astronomer in the 1500s. Copernicus developed his Sun-centered notions
using celes al observations and mathema cs. He demonstrated that the Sun is a star, the
distances to other stars are huge, and Earth orbits the Sun. Perhaps fearing backlash from
religious authori es and a fundamentalist public, Copernicus waited un l the year of his death
(1543) to publish his Sun-centered model of the Universe.
Later, Isaac Newton vastly improved humanity’s concep on of the Universe. He also
established the underpinnings of scientific inquiry. Based on his theory of gravity, Newton
asserted that the Universe is inﬁnite and eternal, without edges in space or me. This model
directly contradicts literal interpretations of Genesis, which clearly describes a beginning to the
physical world. But the ever-devout Newton believed that Genesis referred just to our Solar
System, not to the en re Universe. He also reasoned that a greater Universe indicated a greater
Creator.
Newton published his greatest work, Principia, in 1687. The truths it contains and the approach
it espouses greatly accelerated discoveries of the natural world. It also allowed humanity to
begin reaping the beneﬁts of scientific learning.
Eventually, Chris anity dogma zed Newton’s ideas. Today, most people think of the Universe in
much the same way Newton did. Even so, the Newtonian Universe is false—because it does not
describe the Universe as it is, was, and will be. Figure 2.52 shows the distribu on of object
positions and speeds predicted by a Newtonian Universe.

Figure 2.52. Plot of object positions and veloci es in a Newtonian Universe. As we’ll discover,
this distribu on does not match reality. (Wikimedia)

It Started With A Bang?

Newton’s ideas were wildly successful at explaining much of nature. However, during the 1800s
problema c observations began iden fying the shortcomings of a Newtonian Universe. These
observations included the darkness of the night sky, the orbit of Mercury, and the nature of
light.

3
In the 1800s Heinrich Olbers realized that a dark night sky falsiﬁes Newton’s concept of an
inﬁnite Universe. To understand the connec on, imagine a thick forest like the one illustrated in
Figure 2.53. In such a forest, every line of sight ends in a tree. Like this, every line of sight in an
inﬁnite Universe would end in a star. This would make the en re sky bright. Since the night sky
is dark, the Universe is not inﬁnite. To be sure, the Universe is huge, but it is not inﬁnitely large.

Figure 2.53. Image of a thick pine forest. Notice that every line of sight ends in a tree.
(Wikimedia)
Although Newton’s ideas had accurately described moving objects for nearly twoticenturies,
astronomers in the 1800s recognized that they could not accurately describe the orbit of
Mercury. Scien sts didn’t recognize it at the me, but the problem resulted from Newton’s
ﬂawed concepts of ﬁxed time and constant space.
In addition, observations related to electricity, magne sm, and light iden ﬁed ‘cracks’ in the
Newtonian foundation. These discrepancies were resolved in the early 1900s by scien sts like
Albert Einstein and Edwin Hubble. Their discoveries produced big bang theory, which was a
huge step forward in humanity’s journey towards a more perfect understanding of the
Universe.
Albert’s Iconic Genius
Albert Einstein is a fascinating ﬁgure. With good reason, he has captured humanity’s
imagination. Recognized as gi ed from an early age, he was not par cularly successful early in
life—in part because he responded poorly to rigid educational systems. atter completing his
doctoral studies (but without earning a Ph.D.), Albert could not ﬁnd work. Eventually he began
evaluating technical patents for the Swiss government in Bern (Figure 2.54).

Figure 2.54. Einstein as a patent clerk in Bern, circa 1904. (Wikimedia)

4
In 1905 Einstein published four of the most important papers in the history of science. In one
he presented the special theory of rela vity, which explores the consequences of a constant
speed for light. Consequences indeed! Einstein’s special theory was the seed that grew into an
en rely new, more-true understanding of the Universe.
Whereas the Newtonian Universe was founded in absolute space and me, Einstein’s ideas
require observers traveling at diﬀerent speeds to measure the same speed for light but
measure diﬀerent distances and durations. In other words, special rela vely indicates that the
speed of light is the unchanging en ty. Previously, humanity had falsely supposed that space
and time are constant. This is false, but it is the way that most people con nue to think about
space and me.
Although mind-bendingly counterintui ve, it’s true. Numerous observations support the
‘stretchiness’ of space and me. What’s more, you rely on it frequently. For example, every
me you use the GPS device in your phone.
Einstein was a masterful conceptual thinker with powerful theore cal ability. He o en used
rela vely simple ‘thought experiments’ to great eﬀect and derived keen insight from seemingly
mundane observations. He also used tremendously complex mathema cs with rela ve ease.
Albert’s surprising discoveries made him famous, something he found both beneﬁcial and
confounding.
Einstein’s abili es allowed him to discover the more-true but tremendously-counterintui ve
explanation of gravity we introduced earlier. His General Theory of Rela vity explains that
gravity, the apparent a rac on of material objects, results from interactions between matter
and space me. Namely, he determined that matter causes space time to curve and curved
space time determines how matter moves.
Explosive Consequences of Einstein’s Ideas
Einstein’s General Theory of Rela vity accurately describes aspects of the nature that Newton’s
ideas could not—including the orbit of Mercury, the absolute speed of light, and the
stretchiness of space me. Since then, numerous tests have failed to falsify Einstein’s General
Theory of Rela vity.
This theory represents a triumph of human reasoning and discovery, and it has explosive
implications for the nature of the Universe. Early explorations of General Rela vity Theory
discovered that Einstein’s ideas suggest that the Universe is stretching or inﬂating. Then in 1927
Belgian priest Georges Lemaitre recognized that forward expansion implies backwards
contrac on. Projecting contrac on backwards in me, Lemaitre reasoned that the en re early
Universe was once excep onally small, hot, and simple. Einstein was not a fan of the idea.
Figure 2.55 shows Lemaitre and Einstein during a meeting in which Lemaitre convinced Einstein
he was wrong. Isn’t it cool that a Catholic astronomer-priest played such an important role in
the development of humanity’s understanding of the Universe?! We think so.

5

While these important discoveries were being made in Europe, American astronomers were
also making progress. In 1929, based on earlier work by Vesto Slipher, American Edwin Hubble
made the deﬁni ve observations that established the existence of galaxies beyond the Milky
Way. The observations, which demonstrated that we live in an expanding Universe, were the
last signiﬁcant step in the ini al development of big bang theory.

Figure 2.55. Georges Lemaitre and Albert Einstein. (Wikimedia)
Hubble’s Great Discovery
Let’s look at Hubble’s discovery more closely. With his collaborators, Hubble used the Doppler
shi of spectra to determine the mo on of 29 galaxies. He also es mated the distance to each
galaxy. His data formed a very speciﬁc and reproducible pattern that today we call Hubble’s law.
Hubble’s data, shown in Figure 2.56, are among the most important and ini ally-controversial
observations in the history of scientific inquiry.

Figure 2.56. A plot of galaxy distance versus speed (black dots). The line is Hubble’s Law, the
observation that galac c speed (velocity) increases with distance. (OpenStax University Physics)

A Universe of Truth A U n i v e r s e o f T r u t h

Hubble’s law is important because it ‘nailed the coﬃn shut’ on the Newtonian Universe.
Newton’s ideas predicted the Universe illustrated in Figure 2.52. But the actual Universe forms
the very diﬀerent pattern shown in Figure 2.56. This diﬀerence deﬁni vely falsiﬁed the
Newtonian Universe.
Hubble’s law describes the relationship between distance and velocity for all distant galaxies. In
par cular, it shows that galaxy speed increases with distance. As a result, Hubble’s law

6
par cular, it shows that galaxy speed increases with distance. As a result, Hubble’s law
expresses a fundamental reality of the Universe. Namely, that the Universe has been expanding
since it formed. We’ll use two analogies—a stretching ruler and an inﬂating balloon—to help
you understand the implications of Hubble’s Law.
A ‘Stretched Ruler’ Universe
Imagine that you live in the galaxy at point ‘0’ on the ruler shown in Figure 2.57. Now, consider
how the distances to other galaxies would change if the ruler was stretched to twice its width in
one year. Unsurprisingly, the stretching causes the distances between galaxies to double. As a
result, the nearest galaxy moved 1 m during the year (from 1 m away to 2 m away), the second
galaxy moved 2 m in the year (from 2 to 4 m away), and so on.

Figure 2.57. The ‘Stretched Ruler’ analogy. Le : Image showing a ruler before (top) and atter
(bo om) being stretched to twice its length. Right: A plot of the ‘Hubble’s law of stretched
rulers’. (Author illustration; ruler images modiﬁed from Fraknoi and others, OpenStax
Astronomy)
Can you see that the plots in Figures 2.56 and 2.57 are essen ally iden cal? This similarity
helps us to conceptualize the following important implications of Hubble’s Law:
● The expanding Universe carries galaxies with it as it expands, just like the ruler carried
the ‘galaxies’ with it as it stretched. Said diﬀerently, galaxies are not moving through the
Universe, they are carried by the Universe as it inﬂates. Thus, the ‘speeds’ of galaxies in
Hubble’s Law represent how quickly the Universe is stretching, not how quickly galaxies
are moving through the Universe. To be sure, galaxies do move through the Universe,
but they do this slowly as ‘gravity’ pulls nearby galaxies together. This local mo on is not
the cause of Hubble’s-law veloci es.
● All distant galaxies in the Universe are being carried progressively farther away from
each other, just like the galaxies a ached to the stretched ruler.
● Observers in all galaxies would observe Hubble’s Law. In other words, Hubble’s Law
does not imply that our galaxy lies at the center of the Universe. Instead, it implies that
the en re Universe is expanding, causing distances between all galaxies to increase.
As you can see, the stretched ruler analogy is adept at building intuition about the implications
of Hubble’s Law. The inﬂating balloon analogy is similarly helpful, and it also clariﬁes the
geometry of the Universe. In par cular, it helps us understand how everyday concepts like ‘the

7
geometry of the Universe. In par cular, it helps us understand how everyday concepts like ‘the
center’ and ‘the edge’ do not apply to our Universe in the same way they apply to objects like
balls.
A ‘Stretched-Surface’ Universe
The ‘inﬂating balloon’ analogy reduces our four-dimensional Universe to the two dimensions of
a balloon’s surface. To appropriately understand this analogy, you must consider that nothing
exists above or below the surface of the balloon. Said diﬀerently, you must imagine that
individuals and objects in this ‘balloon universe’ are two-dimensional and exist en rely within
the surface of the balloon. They can move in any direc on across the surface, but they cannot
leave the surface. In the analogy, coins a ached to the surface of the balloon represent
galaxies. So, imagine that you live in one of the ‘coin galaxies’ on the least-inﬂated balloon in
Figure 2.58. Then observe what happens to the distances between the coin galaxies as the
balloon inﬂates.

Figure 2.58. Illustration showing coins a ached to an inﬂating party balloon. As the balloon
expands, the stretching surface of the balloon increases the distances between ‘coin galaxies’.
During stretching, the sizes of the coins remain unchanged, but the distances between them
increase. (Author illustration)
Can you see that inﬂation caused the distances between the galaxies to increase? Clearly, these
distances did not increase because galaxies moved across the surface of the balloon. Instead,
they increased because the surface of the balloon stretched. If we plo ed the distances and
veloci es of the coins on the inﬂating balloon, we would once again create ‘Hubble’s law. This is
true because the balloon stretched uniformly, causing the same same percent of stretching
between all coin galaxies. As a result, short ini al distance increase less than large ini al
distances, just like in Hubble’s Law.
Now, try to iden fy the center or the edge to the surface of the balloon. In other words,
iden fy when a s ck ﬁgure traveling across the surface would reach the edge or center of that
surface. Counterintui ve as it may be, the con nuous surface of a balloon has noticenter and no
edge. The same is true for the Universe, but in four dimensions instead of two. Said diﬀerently,
our Universe does not exist inside something else, so it has no edge. Said a third way, the
Universe encompasses all physical reality. This does not mean that other things could not exist.
It means that anything ‘beyond’ our Universe is physically unknowable to us.
Although the stretched ruler and inﬂating balloon analogies help us conceptualize important

8 Although the stretched ruler and inﬂating balloon analogies help us conceptualize important
aspects of the Universe, in the end they fall short. These intellectual ‘training wheels’ are only
useful in helping us begin to think appropriately about the nature of the Universe, so don’t
push the analogies too far. Also, don’t be too concerned if the Universe seems diﬃcult to
understand. Thinking about the Universe stretches all human minds.

Today, astronomers understand the Universe to be complex, dynamic, and huge (but ﬁnite).
Even though the Newtonian Universe was falsiﬁed more than a century ago, it remains the
model of the Universe that most people carry around in their heads. If you ﬁnd old preparatory
truths s ﬂing and unsa sfying, now is a good time to upgrade your concep on of the Universe.
As we con nue introducing you to more-correct preparatory truths about the Universe, we
invite you to ‘follow in Einstein’s steps’ (Figure 2.59) by further developing your curiosity about
and understanding of the natural world.

Figure 2.59. The steps leading to Albert Einstein’s Bern apartment. Einstein walked these steps
every day for several years while he developed the special theory of rela vity. (Author
photograph)