2.8 Bang!
The Nature of The Big Bang and Evolving Universe
Dr. Brian Tonks and Dr. Dan Moore, Physics and Geology Departments, BYU-Idaho

Nature is an inﬁnite sphere of which the center is everywhere and the circumference nowhere. —
Blaise Pascal

Learning Objectives:
● Deﬁne the cosmic microwave background radiation (CMB) and explain its origin in the attermath of
the Big Bang.
● Describe whether the Big Bang Theory seeks to explain the origin or the development of the
Universe.
● Understand the nature and observational basis for accepting that the developing Universe
expanded, cooled and complexiﬁed.

In the years following Hubble’s 1930 discovery, humanity expended great eﬀort to repeat and
extend Hubble’s observations. As these new observations accumulated, Hubble’s law became
established as observational fact and humanity’s conﬁdence in the reality of an expanding
Universe increased. By the later 1900s, the expanding Universe hypothesis had been
extensively tested and had become the robust well-developed scientific theory that today we
call big bang theory. At present this theory stands alone as humanity’s most-true explanation of
the nature and development of the Universe.
Both big bang theory and wri en scripture witness that the physical Universe has not existed
forever, that it had a beginning. The origin of the Universe is diﬃcult to study using science
because humanity cannot observe what existed before the Big Bang. For this reason, big Bang
Theory is an explanation of the nature and development of the Universe, not its origin.

Understanding the Bang

Although nearly everyone has heard of the Big Bang, few can accurately describe it. Strangely,
many who know almost nothing about the ‘Big Stretch’ express passionate, strongly-held
opposition to it. This deeply ﬂawed approach is a poor way to determine the ‘truth content’ of
this important scientific explanation. As a ﬁrst step in helping strengthen your understanding of
big bang theory, we’ll explore the Big Bang in reverse. Many ﬁnd this approach instructive
because it helps them move from familiar things like ice to less familiar things like quark-gluon
plasmas.

2
Bang It! Back-a-Forwards
To begin, imagine what would happen if you used an inﬁnitely hot blowtorch to progressively
heat solid water. As you know, the ice would ﬁrst melt into liquid water and then vaporize into
gas (at 0 and 100 °C or ~300 and 400 °K, respectively). In these situations, the heat provided by
the blowtorch induces atomic mo on that breaks chemical bonds in the solid and liquid.
This pattern of heating-induced breakup con nues as the steam nears ~10,000 degrees. First,
the steam molecules split into individual hydrogen and oxygen atoms, and then the electrons
begin separating from the nuclei, forming a charged gas called a plasma. On Earth, plasma
exists in high energy environments like the upper atmosphere, near lightning bolts, and inside
‘neon’ lights. Although rare on Earth, most objects in the Universe contain abundant plasma.
Adding additional heat to plasma produces almost unimaginably hot conditions. Above a few
million degrees, electrons fully separate from nuclei, and near a trillion degrees nuclei break
into free protons and neutrons. Then, above about two trillion degrees protons and neutrons
split into particles called quarks. Finally, at even higher temperatures matter converts to pure
light energy, according to Einstein’s famous equation E=mc 2. Figure 2.60 illustrates this pattern
of diminishing order as temperature increases.

Figure 2.60. Illustration showing how increasing temperature breaks matter apart, diminishes
order, and eventually produces only energy. (Author illustration; solid, liquid, gas, and plasma
images from Eames; other images from Wikimedia)
So (and we’re not trying to be ﬂippant), do you consider these processes supernatural ‘acts of
God’? If not, you’re in good company. Almost no one does. Instead, most think that ice melts,
water vaporizes, and so on because ‘the world works that way’. In other words, most people
easily recognize that these are lawful processes. Moreover, although plasmas are unfamiliar,
most readily understand that adding more heat con nues to break things apart. Here’s the
point we’re trying to make: Humanity almost universally views the pattern reviewed above as a
related set of lawful events, the natural consequences of adding heat.
Having explored the Big Bang in reverse, let’s now explore a forward path through the

3 Having explored the Big Bang in reverse, let’s now explore a forward path through the
development of the Universe. This path results from cooling, complexifying, and stretching.
Before we do, ask yourself this: if you believe that melting ice is lawful, do you also believe that
freezing water is lawful? If so, you’re like pre y much everyone else. What’s strange is that few
people extend this acceptance to Big Bang cooling.
So, what happens to stupendously-hot light energy when it expands and cools? Ini ally, this
light energy produces ny, high energy particles called quarks—again according to the lawful
processes governing energy-matter conversions. Then, with con nued expansion and cooling
quarks bond to form protons and neutrons, which form atomic nuclei. Finally, electrons and
nuclei forms gas, gas condenses to liquid, and liquid crystallizes to solid—as illustrated in Figure
2.61.

Figure 2.61. Illustration showing how cooling intensely-hot energy produces progressively more
ordered aspects of matter energy. (Author illustration; solid, liquid, gas, and plasma images
from Eames; other images from Wikimedia)
Here’s the interesting thing: if you tell people about the Big Bang development of the Universe,
they o en react incredulously—and if you tell religious fundamentalists reactions can be far
more energe c and nega ve. However, if you instead present the development of the Universe
in terms of heating-caused breakup and cooling-induced combination most reactions are
something like this, “Cool. That makes a lot of sense.”
These very diﬀerent reactions to the same story likely result from a lack of understanding
coated in a bit of prejudice. In reality, big bang theory tells a fairly simple, uncontroversial story
about the development of the material Universe. Namely, that hot dense energy expanded and
cooled, producing progressively complex and ordered states of matter to emerge. Then later
processes like gravity acted to pull matter together and processes like mo on worked to spread
it apart.
Can you see anything to get excited about there? It’s really pre y intelligible, nonthreatening
stuﬀ. For the religious, opposition to the Big Bang usually boils down to something like this,
“You’re telling me that natural law produced the Universe, but I know that God created the
Universe—so you must be a peddler of lies and a destroyer of faith. I reject big bang theory as

4 Universe—so you must be a peddler of lies and a destroyer of faith. I reject big bang theory as
u erly false!” In other words, their reactions stem mostly from unmet expectations about how
God creates. They are looking for a God that creates like a chef in a kitchen. So, when presented
with the lawful development of the Universe they react strongly because they perceive that big
bang theory displaces God as the Creator. Although misguided, their reactions are usually pure
and o en stem from received spiritual assurances that God created nature.
In our experience, confusion about the relationship between the Creator and Law forms the
core of the supposed conﬂict between discovered and revealed truth, between science and
religion. This apparently insoluble issue readily dissolves when exposed to this truth: God
creates lawfully. From this perspective, ‘God created the Universe’ and ‘The Universe emerged
lawfully’ are diﬀerent but equal ways of expressing the same idea.

atter the Bang

As you now know, big bang theory describes what happened atter the Universe originated. Said
diﬀerently, big bang theory makes detailed quan ta ve predictions about how the Universe
changed as it expanded from an ini al state that was incredibly small, simple, dense, and hot.
These predictions iden fy ‘eras’ characterized by par cular events in the development of the
Universe. These eras are illustrated in Figure 2.62 and described below.

Figure 2.62. Illustration showing the development of our expanding Universe (not to scale).
(NASA)
Era of Atoms. We inhabit the longest developmental era of the Universe. This era began
~380,000 years atter the Big Bang when the emergence of neutral atoms ﬁrst allowed light to
shine through the Universe. Figure 2.63 shows this primordial light, the Cosmic Microwave
Background radiation (CMB). The ﬁrst stars formed during this era, and fusion in these stars
produced elements heavier than helium. In addition, the ﬁrst galaxies formed, complexiﬁed,

5 produced elements heavier than helium. In addition, the ﬁrst galaxies formed, complexiﬁed,
and merged to form larger galaxies. As the abundance of heavy elements increased, planets like
Earth became possible. Our own planetary system formed ~4.54 billion years ago (about two
thirds of the way through the era of Atoms).

Figure 2.63. ‘Baby photo’ of the Universe showing the CMB—the ‘pure light’ that existed
before there were any stars, galaxies, planets, or heavy elements. Blue areas are cooler and
denser than red areas. (NASA)
Era of Nuclei. During this earlier era, the Universe consisted of plasma. At this stage the
Universe was too cool for nuclear fusion but too hot to form neutral atoms or stars. This plasma
made the Universe opaque, in much the same way that thick fog blocks headlights.
Era of Nucleosynthesis. During this era (from 0.001 seconds to 5 minutes atter time began)
temperatures of trillions to billions of degrees produced conditions like those found in the cores
of stars. Protons and neutrons combined to form about 92% hydrogen nuclei and 8% helium
nuclei, with a tiny frac on of light elements like lithium, beryllium, boron, and possibly carbon.
Scien sts iden fy four earlier eras—the Particle, Electroweak, Grand Uniﬁed Theory (GUT),
and Plank eras—that characterize conditions at progressively higher temperatures. Together,
these important eras occupied just a tiny frac on of a second. For most of this me, the
Universe was too hot for matter to exist. It consisted en rely of energy, pure light. During these
eras, space time and the forces that bind matter and govern its interactions were born. In
addition, the Universe experienced extensive inﬂation. Big bang theory extends to the
beginning of the GUT era. Humanity currently possesses only hypotheses for the Plank era and
for that which came before it.

Testing the Bang

As you know, the conﬁdence humanity places in a scientific theory is directly propor onal to
the number and quality of tests that fail to falsify the theory. Among all tests, predicted
observations (previously-unobserved a ributes of the natural world that should exist if the
theory is true) are par cularly powerful. This is not hard to understand. When predicted
aspects of the natural world are observed, those observations indicate the theory has

6
aspects of the natural world are observed, those observations indicate the theory has
‘explanatory power’—an important characteris c of truth.
In addition to progressively stretched space me, big bang theory makes a number of additional
predictions about the nature of the Universe. Some of these are listed in Table 2.2.
Table 2.2 Generalized predictions of Big Bang Theory.

Signiﬁcantly, all the predicted a ributes have been observed. We illustrate the importance of
these observations using the last two predictions.
Early progress in understanding the Big Bang was painfully slow because few scien sts were
studying the early Universe, digital computer did not yet exist, and humanity s ll
misunderstood some aspects of the subatomic world. Humanity overcame these obstacles by
the 1970s. Meaningfully, observations related to humanity’s well-tested theory of subatomic
world were unable to falsify Big Bang Theory. For example, in 2018 humanity used a ‘particle
collider’ (CERN) to reproduce the temperatures of the Universe just one-trillionth of a second
atter the Big Bang (~1500 trillion degrees). Incredible, right?! Powerfully, quan ta ve
observations of experiments such as this are consistent with the speciﬁc quan ta ve
predictions of big bang theory.

Figure 2.64. Arno Penzias, Robert Wilson, and the radio antennae with which they discovered
the CMB. (NASA)
Big bang theory also predicts the existence of high energy light produced when the early
Universe ﬁrst became transparent. Iden ﬁed in the 1940s, this predic on includes the speciﬁc
wavelength and eﬀective temperature of this light. In the 1960s, Princeton astronomers
rediscovered this predic on at about the same time the scien sts in Figure 2.64 were preparing

7 rediscovered this predic on at about the same time the scien sts in Figure 2.64 were preparing
to study radio emissions from the Milky Way. During their preparations Penzias and Wilson
discovered what they thought was a spurious signal in their measurements. However, atter
eliminating poten al sources of error, the ‘noise’ remained. Deeply puzzled by this signal, they
made contact with the Princeton astronomers. These groups soon realized they had discovered
the predicted residual light, which today called the Cosmic Microwave Background radiation
(CMB, Figure 2.63).
Today, improved observational ability allows humanity to con nue reﬁning and extending big
bang theory.

So, there it is. That’s big bang theory. Is it what you thought it was? At a minimum, we hope
that you now understand that:
● Big bang theory explains the development of the Universe, not its origin. Speciﬁcally, it
explains how the developing Universe expanded, cooled, and complexiﬁed.
● To date, no observations of nature have falsiﬁed big bang theory.
● Big bang theory fulﬁlls the functions of scientific theory by accurately describing the
physical world, synthesizing otherwise unrelated aspects of nature, and guiding future
research.
Sadly, scientific and religious fundamentalists would have you understand the development of
the Universe either in terms of God’s Words or using the witness of God’s Works. We reaﬃrm
that there can be no conﬂict between true interpretations of wri en and natural scripture.
We’ve tried to illustrate this while introducing you to the ‘Big Stretch’. In short, we assert that
the truth content of big bang theory is high. As you evaluate that asser on, we encourage you
to employ a sound principles and approaches. Happy evaluating!