2.9 Bang? 
The State of Big Bang Theory Today
Dr. Brian Tonks and Dr. Dan Moore, Physics and Geology Departments, BYU-Idaho

In string theory, all particles are vibrations on a tiny rubber band; physics is the harmonies on the
string; chemistry is the melodies we play on vibrating strings; the universe is a symphony of
strings, and the 'Mind of God' is cosmic music resonating in 11-dimensional hyperspace. —Michio
Kaku
Learning Objectives:
● Describe how the scientific hypotheses known as dark matter and dark energy seek to explain
observed characteris cs of the Universe within the context of big bang theory.
● Describe the level of conﬁdence that humanity should have in the big bang theory, given the theory
predictions that have been observed.
● Describe the oﬃcial position of The Church about big bang theory.

Following the astounding 1960s discovery of the predicted cosmic microwave background
radiation, humanity rapidly replaced the false Newtonian Universe with the signiﬁcantly more
true and perhaps ul mately true Big Bang Universe. Since that me, big bang theory has
con nued to develop. scientific theories develop for the same reasons that base camps move.
Climbers use base camps as launching points for explorations of mountains. Likewise, scien sts
use theories like big bang theory as a base from which to ini ate further explorations, in this
case of the Universe.
Today big bang theory is a robust well-tested, -developed, and -respected scientific theory and
stands alone as humanity’s most-true explanation of the nature and development of the
Universe. Recent developments in human understanding of the Universe have resulted from
new astronomical observations and progressing knowledge of the subatomic world. These
developments include the search for hypothesized dark matter and dark energy.

Reﬁning the Big Bang
Early development of big bang theory resulted from answers to the ‘horizon’ and ‘ﬂatness’
questions. Today, the theory con nues developing as humanity searches for solutions to
questions related to ‘missing mass’ and ‘accelerating expansion’.
Early Questions
Early big bang theory struggled to explain why the large-scale Universe appears ‘ﬂat’ and looks the
same along all ‘horizons’, in all directions.

2

Light from the earliest Universe reaches us from all directions. As a result, humanity can see almost 13.8
billion light years away in every direc on. So, objects separated by more than 13.79 billion lightyears
could never have interacted because light travels only one lightyear each year. If the most-distant parts
of the Universe didn’t interact, why do they look the same? In other words, why didn’t they follow
diﬀerent developmental paths? This is the ‘horizon’ ques on.
The ‘ﬂatness’ ques on is similar. Because matter (mass) curves space me, the large-scale Universe
should appear curved, not ﬂat. Only very special conditions could produce the observed ﬂatness, and
special conditions are ‘red ﬂags’. Their presence doesn’t ensure a problem, but it signals the need to
carefully evaluate the conclusion to ensure it is valid.
Alan Guth elegantly solved both problems in 1984, by hypothesizing excep onally rapid ‘inﬂation’ in the
very early Universe. This nearly instantaneous expansion stretched the Universe almost a billion billion
mes, from the size of a nucleus to the size of a basketball. Before inﬂation, all parts of the Universe
were uniform because they mixed. In this way inﬂation forever separated essen ally iden cal portions
—making the Universe appear uniform in all directions. This period of intense inﬂation also made a
curved Universe appear ﬂat over the very small por on we can see, in much the same way that the
curved surface of Earth appears ﬂat when viewed locally. To date, no observations have been able to
falsify Guth’s solu on to the horizon and ﬂatness problems, and inﬂation has become part of big bang
theory.
If these notions stretch your mind, don’t worry. The takeaway idea is that early questions were
answered. Today, the big questions understanding the Universe relate to missing mass and accelerating
expansion.

Where’s Waldo?
Numerous observations provide clues about the amount and distribu on of mass in the
Universe. These include orbital speeds in galaxies, galac c formation models, and the motions
of galaxies in clusters. The problem is that these clues indicate that observed matter (mass)
accounts for only ~15% of that required to explain the observations, which implies that we are
‘missing’ most (~85%) of the mass.
When astronomer Fritz Zwicky ﬁrst noticed this problem in 1939, he hypothesized that galaxies
contain dark matter, a type of matter that interacts gravitationally with ‘normal matter’ but
does not interact with light. At the me, the lack of observational evidence caused most to take
a ‘wait and see’ approach to his proposal. However, in the 1970s Vera Rubin found impossible-
to-ignore evidence. Speciﬁcally, she observed that there is insuﬃcient ‘visible matter’ in
galaxies to account for how fast they rotate. Since then, scien sts have been unable to falsify
the dark matter hypothesis, but they’ve also been unable to conclusively demonstrate its
reality. Today, the ‘missing mass’ ques on remains an active area of research.
What Shoved the Universe?
As you know, Earth’s ‘tug’ causes balls thrown upwards to slow as they rise. Like these balls, the
expansion of the Universe should slow through me. Here’s the problem: the expansion of the

3 expansion of the Universe should slow through me. Here’s the problem: the expansion of the
Universe hasn’t consistently slowed. In fact, accurate observations of galac c distances and
redshi s made in the 1990s indicate that expansion began accelerating ~4 billion years ago.
More recent observations have conﬁrmed this pattern, which has profound implications for the
nature of the Universe.
Dark energy is a hypothesized force that opposes the collapsing eﬀect of matter. According to
this hypothesis, the expansion of the Universe began accelerating when the size of the Universe
allowed the ‘push’ of dark energy to overcome the ‘pull’ of matter (gravity).
An important line of testing for dark energy involves comparing models of the Universe to
observations of the cosmic microwave background radiation. In recent decades, astronomers
have measured the CMB very precisely. Currently, the measurements are most consistent with
a Universe that formed 13.799 ± 0.040 billion years ago and consists of ordinary matter, dark
matter, and dark energy—in the proportions shown in Figure 2.65.

Figure 2.65. The hypothesized composition of the Universe. (NASA)
Neither dark matter nor dark energy challenge big bang theory, but resolving these issues will
signiﬁcantly expand human understanding of the Universe. If abundant observations fail to
falsify these hypotheses, dark matter and energy will become part of big bang theory.
Conversely, if these hypotheses are falsiﬁed, other hypotheses will replace them. Stay tuned for
future developments. These questions will likely be answered in your life me.

Is It True?

So, is big bang theory true? Useful answers to this ques on include the following:
● Without doubt, big bang theory has tremendous explanatory power.
● At the very least, big bang theory is an excep onally useful preparatory truth.
● Big bang theory is a well-developed, -tested, and -respected scientific theory that
accurately describes the Universe, connects otherwise-unrelated aspects of nature, and
guides future research.
● Big bang theory has not yet been disqualiﬁed as a candidate that could develop into
absolute truth.

4
● Today, big bang theory stands overwhelmingly in ﬁrst place as humanity’s best, most
complete, truest explanation of the nature and development of the Universe.
Why is the big bang theory true? Because it validly explains observed a ributes of the physical
world. That is, it describes nature as it is. As a result, the ‘truth content’ of big bang theory is
very high. For this reason honest seekers of truth value the big bang theory for what it is: an
excellent preparatory truth and humanity’s most-true, best-ever explanation for the
development of the Universe. Even so, only a scientific dogma st would consider big bang
theory as true in any absolute sense. As dark matter and dark energy show, there is s ll much to
learn about the Universe.
As humanity’s observational ability grows, we will con nue to reﬁne this important theory. At
some point along the journey to perfect understanding we may discover the explanatory limits
of big bang theory. If we do, humanity will disqualify it as a contender for absolute truth. Of
course, if disqualiﬁed, it will remain—for all eternity—as a valid explanation of the aspects of
the natural world that were unable to falsify it. So, if big bang theory is later falsiﬁed, we’ll
thank it for a great ride and trade it for a betterpony—a betterpreparatory truth that will more
fully explain the Universe. No matter what becomes of big bang theory, humanity’s shortest
path to understanding the physical Universe is through big bang theory.
Does big bang theory challenge your faith?
Some individuals perceive that big bang theory opposes faith in God. These challenges can
result from perceiving that big bang theory eliminates the need for a Creator or the purpose of
human existence. Big bang theory need do neither.
For those commi ed to human-style (agent-designed) creation, the lawful creation inherent in
big bang theory can feel atheis c. These individuals yearn to iden fy aspects of nature that
cannot be explained by natural processes. We assert that such well-inten oned searches are
misplaced and that lawful creation is part of what God meant when he said, ‘my ways [of
creation] are higher [diﬀerent] than your ways’ (Isaiah 55).
Yearnings for unnatural or supernatural explanations burn par cularly bright regarding aspects
of nature that are ‘perfectly tuned’ for speciﬁc functions. These include a Universe and Earth
that are ‘perfectly tuned’ to bring forth and nurture living organisms. However, ‘seting all the
control dials’ exactly right is only one way—an agent-designed way—to produce such ﬁne
tuning.
Another way is to lawfully organize numerous creations that represent all possible
combinations of ‘dial setings’. In this model, a certain frac on of these numerous creations will
be ‘perfectly tuned’ to form and foster living things, and the remainder of the creations will not.
Signiﬁcantly, the idea of ‘innumerable’ planets in our own Universe, each representing a
par cular combination of ‘dial setings’, is becoming observed reality. What’s more, the idea of
mul ple Universes is an intriguing possibility suggested by current scientific hypotheses and

5 mul ple Universes is an intriguing possibility suggested by current scientific hypotheses and
these Godly Words, ‘in my Father’s house are many mansions’ (John 14).
In addition to other roadblocks, some religious people are turned oﬀ by the militantly atheis c
a tudes of dogma c scientific fundamentalists, who o en use Big Bang or other scientific
theories inappropriately in an eﬀort to diminish faith in God. However, the misuse of truth by
fundamentalists has no impact on the truthfulness of ideas. We are each responsible to ﬁnd
truth, no matter its source or packaging. Thankfully, those who understand the core meanings
and appropriates uses of reasoned, discovered, and revealed truths cannot be mislead by
fundamentalist blowhards—scientific or religious.

A Final Word

As we complete our exploration of the large-scale Universe, we invite you to take a moment to
assess what you have learned …for example, about big bang theory, scientific theories in
general, and the origin of order found in planets, stars, galaxies and the Universe.
atter learning about the Universe, many are impressed by its vastness; the role of law in
producing ordered systems such as stars, planets, and galaxies; and the simplicity and beauty of
big bang theory. In addition, many are surprised by the absence of doctrinal conﬂicts.
We hope you’ve enjoyed the ‘Universal’ por on of our journey From Atoms to Humans. Having
looked at order in the Cosmos above, we now turn our focus to order in the Earth beneath.