3.1 Rough Stone Rolling
Earth’s Dynamic Nature
Dr. Dan Moore and Dr. Brian Tonks, Geology and Physics Departments, BYU-Idaho

Are these the end mes? Yes. And they have been this way since the beginning. Welcome to
planet Earth, a wonderful but not en rely stable place to live. —Craig Childs
Learning Objectives:
● Understand and be able to identify each of the following: convection, tectonic plates, ocean basins,
continents, tectonic plate boundaries, mountain belts, volcanic provinces, earthquakes,
supercontinents, climate, greenhouse gases, the greenhouse eﬀect, weathering, and the
Precambrian and Phanerozoic (which consists of the Paleozoic, Mesozoic and Cenozoic) me
periods.
● Brieﬂy describe the natural processes responsible for each type of Earth change: tectonic change,
sea level change, climate change, surface change, biological change, and impact change. Also,
understand the interrelatedness of these types of change.
● Understand that the normal state for Earth is constant change.

Craters form when solids orbiting the Sun collide with a planet. The Moon and Mercury remain
heavily cratered from the bombardment that all planets received during their formation, and
yet almost no craters are visible today on Earth. Why is that? Every year rivers carry billions of
tons of sediment from mountains into the ocean basins, and yet mountains remain and oceans
basins are not full of sediment. How can that be? Every year there are several million
earthquakes. What causes them?
The answers to ques ons like these rest on the single most important characteristic of our
planet: Earth is active, dynamic, ‘alive’. In other words, Earth changes. For example, continents
move, sea level rises and falls, climate changes, new species emerge, and old species go extinct.
Understanding how the Earth changes is important. It enables society to locate the fuel and
metals used by civilization and minimize pollu on and climate change. It also satisfies human
curiosity and helps humanity avoid the nega ve eﬀects of dynamic Earth events like
earthquakes and volcanic erup ons.
Most Earth change results from processes driven by the slow release of Earth’s internal heat
and energy from the Sun. The theory of plate tectonics explains how the release of internal
heat causes solid rock deep inside Earth to ﬂow, which in turn drives abundant surface change.
The development of plate tectonic theory provides an excellent example of how scientiﬁc
explanations form.

2
The Development and Nature of Plate Tectonics
In the 1600-1800s, naturalists like Francis Bacon and Benjamin Franklin proposed that the
puzzle-piece-ﬁt of Africa and South America indicated they had once been united. At the me,
hypotheses like these lacked testable explanations, and so they remained outside the purview
of science.

Figure 3.1. Le : Photos of Alfred Wegener in Antarc ca and Harry Hess as a captain during
World War II. (Images from Wikimedia)
Alfred Wegener (Figure 3.1) extended these earlier proposals by making speciﬁc predictions
based on his ‘continental dri ’ hypothesis. For example, he correctly predicted the distribu on
of ancient organisms shown in Figure 3.2. Unfortunately, Wegener’s notions were rejected
because he could not explain how continents moved and because humanity knew little about
key aspects of Earth like the ocean basins.

Figure 3.2. Image showing the distribu ons of prominent fossil organisms in Southern Pangaea
across continents that are now separated. (Image from Wikimedia)

3

This all changed very rapidly in the mid 1900s. During this me technological advances made it
possible for humanity to observe the topography of ocean basins; Earth’s interior; and the ages,
magne sm, and density of rocks. For example, during World War II ocean scientist Harry Hess
(Figure 3.1) used sonar and other instruments on the ship he captained to begin mapping the
seaﬂoor. Hess and others like him discovered many previously unobserved features of the
ocean basins. These included deep trenches that parallel volcanic arcs, chains of ocean islands,
and long ocean ridges. Based on these and other observations, Hess hypothesized that the
seaﬂoor was a vast conveyor belt for oceanic crust. In other words, Hess proposed that new
oceanic crust forms at ocean ridges, ages as it moves across the seaﬂoor, and then plunges into
Earth’s interior at oceanic trenches.
Hess’s ‘seaﬂoor spreading’ provided the mechanism that Wegener’s ‘continental dri ’ lacked.
A er extensive tes ng, seaﬂoor spreading and associated hypotheses merged to form the
theory of plate tectonics. Today, plate tectonics remains unfalsiﬁed and is one of humanity’s
most extensively tested scientiﬁc theories. Figure 3.3 shows Earth’s major tectonic plates and
the movement associated with each plate boundary.

Figure 3.3. Le : Illustration showing rela ve motion across boundaries between Earth’s major
tectonic plates. Right: Diagrams showing relation plate motion at divergent, convergent, and
transform boundaries. (Author illustration; images from Wikimedia)

How Earth Changes

The theory of plate tectonics explains how the slow ﬂow of solid rock (convection) and Earth’s
tectonic plates produce features like mountain belts and continents. Inside Earth, rock bodies of
diﬀerent densi es drive convection. For example, cool dense rock near Earth’s surface can
slowly sink into and through the mantle (Figure 3.4). Likewise, hot low-density rock inside Earth
can slowly ﬂow upward (Figure 3.4). Thus, convection in the mantle involves both the in-fall of

4
can slowly ﬂow upward (Figure 3.4). Thus, convection in the mantle involves both the in-fall of

rigid surface lithosphere and the rise of duc le mantle. These dominantly ver cal motions
produce the horizontal plate motion we observe at the surface, as illustrated in Figures 3.3-3.4.
The surface and interior motion of solid rock on Earth occurs slowly, about as fast as your ﬁnger
nails grow (0.5-4 in or 1-10 cm per year).

Figure 3.4. Cross-section illustrating the relationship between the surface movement of
tectonic plates, the in-fall of rigid surface rock, and the rise of duc le mantle rock. Compare this
cross section to the the map and cross sections of plate boundaries in Figure 3.3. Also, note
that the near-surface areas with a red s ppled pa ern indicate where solid mantle par ally
melts to form magma. This can rise into the crust, as shown. (Author illustration)
Tectonic Change. Tectonic plates meet at narrow plate boundaries. Along these dynamic
margins plates converge, diverge, or slide sideways past each other (Figure 3.3). Nearly all
tectonic change occurs near plate boundaries. These changes include volcanic activity,
earthquake-generating movement along faults, the formation and destruction of ocean basins,
and the growth of continents.
Most tectonic plates contain both the denser crust that forms ocean basins and the less-dense
crust that forms continents. Below Earth’s rocky crust lie denser chemical layers, the rocky
mantle and metallic core. Figure 3.5 iden ﬁes Earth’s chemical and physical layers, and

Figure 3.5. Cross-sections showing Earth’s chemical and mechanical layers. Chemical layers:
gray metallic core, green rocky mantle, and brown crust; dark brown is oceanic crust and light
brown is continental crust. Physical layers: brown and lightest green rigid, rocky lithosphere;

5
brown is continental crust. Physical layers: brown and lightest green rigid, rocky lithosphere;
light green duc le, rocky upper mantle; dark green rigidly duc le, rocky lower mantle; light gray
liquid, metal outer core; and dark gray rigid, metal inner core. (Author illustrations)
Although tectonic plates move slowly, their relentless motion can move continents great
distances across Earth’s surface. Occasionally, tectonic motion causes most of Earth’s
landmasses to merge, forming supercontinents like Pangaea and Rodinia. The movement of
tectonic plates can also cause continents to split, as is happening in East Africa today. As plates
move about, their interactions can produce upli ed bands of crust called mountain belts as
well as volcanic provinces in which voluminous magmatterupts.
Movement along plate boundaries is not con nuous. Instead, they move in ‘s ck-slip’ fashion.
Stress builds up along the boundary during periods in which almost no motion occurs. Then in
just a few moments, solid rock bodies break along faults, ‘slip’ rapidly past each other, and then
become ‘stuck’ again. These rapid movements release tremendous amounts of stored energy in
events called earthquakes. In addition to creating beau ful vistas and causing natural
‘disasters’, tectonic processes aﬀect sea level, climate, and the distribu on of biological
environments.
Sea Level Change. The rise and fall of global sea level causes the oceans to spread over and
retreat from the continents. This sea level change profoundly alters the nature of Earth’s
surface through me. Changes in sea level result primarily from tectonic process that aﬀect the
volume of the ocean basins and climate processes that aﬀect the volume of continental ice
sheets. In par cular, global sea level rises when vigorous ocean-ridge activity raises the seaﬂoor
or when warming climate returns water to the oceans from melting continental ice. Likewise,
global sea level falls when low ocean-ridge activity increases the volume of ocean basins or
when cooling climate progressively moves ocean water into expanding continental ice sheets.
Climate Change. Climate is long-term average weather and can be characterized by a ributes
like temperature and precipitation. Global climate, which averages climate across Earth, has
varied greatly throughout Earth’s history. In fact, change is the normal state for global climate.
Global climate change, which we’ll explore in more detail later, results from global variations in
a ributes like the rates of mountain building and volcanism. Global climate change aﬀects the
nature, abundance, and distribu on of living species.
The global climate system is tremendously complex and involves the ﬂow of energy and matter
between Earth’s various ‘spheres’—namely, the atmosphere, hydrosphere, ‘ice-sphere’
(cryosphere), rocky Earth, and biosphere. The principal cause of global climate change is
variation in the concentrations of atmospheric greenhouse gases. Greenhouse gases are near-
surface atmospheric molecules like carbon dioxide that can warm Earth’s surface by trapping
energy, a process referred to as the greenhouse eﬀect.
Natural processes that move carbon between the atmosphere and solid Earth control the
concentrations of atmospheric greenhouse gases, as illustrated in Figure 3.6. These processes
include carbon sources like volcanoes and carbon sinks like the formation of carbon-bearing

6 include carbon sources like volcanoes and carbon sinks like the formation of carbon-bearing
rocks (such as limestone or coal). Moving carbon from solid Earth to the atmosphere warms
global climate, and transferring carbon from the atmosphere into rock cools Earth.

Figure 3.6. Illustration showing the large-scale controls of Earth’s climate system. Carbon (C)
sources warm Earth (red arrow) and carbon sinks cool Earth (blue arrow). (Author illustration)
Surface Change. Earth’s surface consists of environments such as beaches, streams, and lakes,
as illustrated in Figure 3.7. Surface change is the shi ing of these surface environments and
results from tectonic, climate, sea level, and biological change. These processes change the
surface by exposing deep rock, shi ing depositional environments, and sotion. Features
produced by surface change include eroded highlands, transported sediment, and sediment-
ﬁlled basins.

Figure 3.7. Surface environments that transport and capture sediment. (Adapted from
Wikimedia)
Biological Change. Earth’s biosphere consists of all living things, from abundant single-celled
organisms to less abundant plants and animals. The biosphere con nuously interacts with other
Earth systems. Biologic change is the shi in the characteris cs of populations that result when
things like climate change. Biologic change produces features such as the appearance of new
species (speciation), extinction of existing species, and alteration of Earth’s atmospheric
composition. Geologists use past biologic change to deﬁne the dis nct periods of Earth’s history
shown in Figure 3.8.

7

Figure 3.8. A simpliﬁed Geologic Timescale. (Author illustration)
During the Hadean Eon, systems formed that eventually made Earth habitable. These include
the rocky Earth, Moon, oceans, atmosphere, and magne c ﬁeld. At this me, Earth was hot and
covered by a thick atmosphere lacking breathable oxygen. The early rock record suggest that no
living things were able to persist in this environment. In the Precambrian Eon, single-celled life
thrived, modern plate tectonics developed, oxygen levels in Earth’s atmosphere rose to modern
levels, and the ﬁrst simple animals emerged. During the Paleozoic Era, Earth developed a
modern atmosphere and complex animals and plants were abundant and ﬂourished. In the
mostly warm Mesozoic Era mammals, dinosaurs, ﬂying rep les, and ﬂowering plants
developed. Then during the Cenozoic mammals diversiﬁed and thrived; primates, grasses, and
hominins (bipedal primates) developed; and Earth’s climate cooled. Together, the Paleozoic,
Mesozoic, and Cenozoic form the Phanerozoic Eon.
Impact Change. Impacts occur when Earth collides with other solids that orbit the Sun.
Typically, these objects have orbited the Sun since the formation of our Solar System. Today,
most impactors are small, like the sand-sized grains that produce ‘shooting stars’. When large
objects collide with Earth they do great damage. For example, the last mountain-sized asteroid
that struck Earth caused ~75% of species on Earth to become extinct, including all ﬂightless
dinosaurs. Impacts rapidly change many aspects of Earth and produce features such as craters.
Exploring Earth’s Past
Our normal units for measuring me—seconds, days, years and centuries—are nearly useless
when faced with the enormity of geological me. Humanity uses the shorthand notation of
Table 3.1 and the geologic eras of Figure 3.8 to communicate geological me. Ensure that you
can use this shorthand before proceeding. Use these phrases to prac ce: anatomically modern
humans ﬁrst appeared ~300 kya; our species has prac ced se led agriculture for the last ~11.5
ky; ﬂightless dinosaurs became extinct 66 Mya, at the end of the Mesozoic; and Earth formed
~4.54 Bya.
As we did when working to conceptualize the immensity of the Universe, we’ll use an analogy
to develop our intuition of deep me. This analogy uses distance to illustrate me. Speciﬁcally,
we’ll represent 80 years with one inch (2.54 cm). In other words he analogy, the length of your
thumb above the knuckle will represent an average modern lifespan (~80 years). Using this
analogy, we’ll proceed backwards from the present to the formation of the Universe.

8
Table 3.1. Deep me symbols

Figure 3.9. Illustration of analogy distances related to the development of humans. The analogy
centers on the BYU-Idaho Physical Sciences Building in Rexburg, Idaho. If the geography of
southeast Idaho is unfamiliar to you, consider applying the scale distances to an area with
which you are familiar. (Author illustration, basemap from Google Earth)
Development of Humans. As you know, humans belong to groups of organisms known as
mammals, primates, apes (hominids), and hominins (bipedal apes). Figure 3.9 shows analogy
distances for several important events related to the development of humans. You might ﬁnd it
interesting to think of some recent events in terms of generations. Using 20 years as a
generation, ~100 generations have passed since Jesus Christ’s birth, ~600 generations have
passed since humanity began farming and living in ci es, and ~2,000 human generations have
passed since modern behaviors became widespread. Moreover, modern human bodies have
existed for ~15,000 generations and there were ~26,000 Neanderthal generations, ~100,000
Homo erectus generations, and ~250,000 Australopith generations. (More on these important
and fascinating organisms later.)
Development of Earth. Earth became habitable for animals and plants rather late in its
development. Figure 3.10 shows analogy distances for several important events related to the
development of Earth and Life. If you take the me, you can use the analogy to establish

9
development of Earth and Life. If you take the me, you can use the analogy to establish

introductory intuition for magnitude of geological me. This intuition will become increasingly
important as we proceed.If you’ll take the me,

Figure 3.10. Illustration of analogy distances related to the development of Earth and Life.
(Author illustration, base map from Google Earth)
Development of the Universe, Earth, and Life. Earth has existed for about the last third of the
history of the Universe. Figure 3.11 shows analogy distances for several important events
related to the development of the Universe, Earth, and Life. Pause to study this ﬁgure before
proceeding.

Figure 3.11. Illustration of analogy distances related to the development of the Universe, Earth,
and Life. (Author illustration, base map from Google Earth)

10

Earth Constantly Changes
Earth’s dynamic nature ensures that Earth is constantly changing. In fact, even periods of
rela ve steadiness involve signiﬁcant change. Said diﬀerently, periods of nearly constant Earth
conditions typically result from balanced change between vigorously-active processes—not
from a lack of change. To help you begin conceptualizing how much Earth has changed, let’s
explore how Western North America has changed through me. We’ll focus on the area
marked by the star in Figures 3.12-14.
Tectonic change has produced volcanoes, mountain belts, and faults in Western North America
numerous mes—most recently from the mid Mesozoic to today, as illustrated in Figure 3.12.
These features are recorded by igneous rock bodies, numerous faults, and several miles of
eroded rock.

Figure 3.12. Paleogeographic map of a recent period when tectonic activity produced
mountains, volcanoes, and faults in the starred area. Take a moment to identify changes in
other areas. (Base map by Ron Blakey )
In addition to producing mountains and volcanoes, tectonic change has moved the continents
across the globe. This has taken the starred area into both equatorial and arc c regions.
Tectonic movements also built at least ﬁve supercontinents. What’s more, climate and other
change has caused oceans to cover Western North America many mes. Figure 3.13 shows a
submerged period during middle Paleozoic and a me when the area was part of a
supercontinent.

Figure 3.13. Maps illustrating oceanic (le ) and supercontinental (right) periods in the
development of Western North America. The organisms that thrived (and died) in these and
similar seas are recorded by fossils. The illustrated supercontinent, Panno a, predated Pangea
and came a er Rodinia. (Base maps by Ron Blakey)

11

Tectonic, climate, and sea level change have shi ed the depositional environments that cover
Earth’s surface. Figure 3.14 illustrates a few of these changes. These include periods when
Western North America contained thick ice sheets, Sahara-like deserts, and ocean shorelines.

Figure 3.14. Periods when the starred area contained glacial ice sheets, a Sahara-like desert, a
shoreline (beach), and deep seas. (Base maps by Ron Blakey)
Of course, Western North America is not unique. Essen ally every continental location records
a similarly diverse history. Said diﬀerently, locations across the Earth have experienced nearly
every type of surface feature, usually many mes. So, think of a favorite area, and then
recognize that that it has been covered by many diﬀerent environments—mountains, lakes,
deserts, beaches, glaciers, swamps, oceans, and sotion. What’s more, Earth was nearly
unrecognizable for most of its history. For example, Earth’s atmosphere was unbreathable for
nearly 4 billion years (~86% of Earth history), the cores of the continents took nearly two billion
years to form, and Earth’s en re surface was molten at least three mes.
Without doubt, Earth change is real and really extensive. As we proceed, we’ll explore
important changes in the development of our habitable home. For now, augment your physical
intuition with this important reality: what is normal for Earth is constant change, not a set of
average conditions—and certainly not average modern conditions.