3.2 Elementary, My Dear Watson!
What Earth Materials and Features Can Teach Us and How We
Learn It
Dr. Dan Moore and Dr. Brian Tonks, Geology and Physics Departments, BYU-Idaho

Earth is ancient now, but all knowledge is stored up in her. She keeps a record of everything that
has happened since me began. … Through me, her secret codes have gradually been broken.
Her mud and lava is a message from the past. Of me to come, she says much, but who listens?
―Jeane e Winterson
Learning Objectives:
● Understand rela ve dating and how to use its principles to sequence events. Also, understand
absolute dating and how humanity determines the ages of Earth events.
● Illustrate how observations of the structure and composition of rocks allow humanity to interpret
the sequence, age, and nature of Earth events—including past states of and processes that modify
Earth materials.
● identify the meaning of igneous, sedimentary, and metamorphic rocks, erosional surfaces, and
faults/ lted sedimentary rocks.
● identify a likely way a past Earth event would be recorded for modern observers.

Many ideas about Earth that seem like ‘no-brainers’ to the modern mind took considerable
me, eﬀort, courage, and genius to discover. Humanity understands so much about nature
today that we o en look back and wonder how they believed what they did. For example, how
could they have believed that the Earth was the center of the universe or that it was ﬂat? Why
did they misunderstand so much? Were they stupid?
No way! Their lack of understanding came from insuﬃcient access to information, false
traditions, and diminished opportunity for innovation—not from weak intellects. Opportunity
and focus facilitate discovery, and people cannot form correct ideas without the necessary
observations. Moreover, the intellectual iner a of false traditions can form nearly impenetrable
barriers, as can pressure to conform to social norms. What’s more, when cultures enforce false
ideas by shaming, coercing, or death the production of new ideas slows and can cease. All these
barriers have inhibited the discovery and acceptance of truth about Earth. Even today, these
barriers impede the acceptance of truth in the lives of some individuals, groups, and cultures.
As we explored the tremendous changes Earth has experienced since its formation, you no
doubt wondered how we know so much about Earth’s past. A er all, Earth is ancient and
humans did not observe most past events. Although it may surprise you, Earth materials record
the sequence, age, and nature of past Earth events. For example, the relationships between

2 the sequence, age, and nature of past Earth events. For example, the relationships between
rock bodies record the sequence of Earth events, and the composition of materials can record
the age of past events. In addition, the structure and composition of Earth materials records the
nature of Earth events—as when we interpret ancient igneous rocks as recording the past
intrusion or erup on of magma.

Sequencing Earth Events

Human a tudes towards Earth have changed through me. During the Middle Ages study of
the Earth proceeded slowly in the West because people believed that nature was base and
dark. These a tudes are portrayed in period stories like Little Red Riding Hood. Later, during
the Roman c movement of the 1800s Western Civilization began to think of nature as
ennobling, and humanity has only recently (in the 1970s!) began a empting to care for our
planetary home.
As a tudes and needs changed, humanity began searching for ways to understand Earth.
During the Renaissance, wealthy natural philosophers and those engaged in Earth-related
activi es like mining began to discover the origin and functioning of Earth. Unfortunately, the
scholas c dogma sm and religious fundamentalism of the Middle Ages did not yield easily to
their observations and discoveries. Even so, the light of discovery, facilitated by the principles of
rela ve da ng, slowly began falsifying earlier notions. Sadly, some modern individuals choose
to retain early false notions.

Figure 3.15. Block diagram illustrating the relationships between the labeled rock bodies
described in the table. The order of events, from oldest to youngest feature, is G, A, B, C, H, D,
E, F. (Author illustration, image adapted from Wikimedia)
As early naturalists observed Earth, they gradually began to recognize the pa erns summarized
in the principles of rela ve da ng, a set of powerful scientiﬁc laws that allow humanity to
determine the sequences of Earth events. For example, the principle of original horizontality
states that sediments originally form in horizontal layers. Moreover, superposition indicates that
older undisturbed sedimentary layers lie beneath younger layers, and lateral con nuity
indicates that sedimentary layers separated by erosion were once con nuous.
Danish naturalist Nicholas Steno developed the principles described above in the mid 1600s.

3 Danish naturalist Nicholas Steno developed the principles described above in the mid 1600s.
During the following century, naturalists discovered additional principles. For example, the
principle of crosscuting relationships indicates that broken rock bodies are older than the
features that cut across them, and the principle of inclusions indicates that materials inside a
rock existed before the rock that contains them.
Can you use the principles described above to sequence the events that produced the labeled
rock bodies illustrated in Figure 3.15? If so, you understand them suﬃciently to proceed.
William Smith discovered the last principle of rela ve dating in the late 1700s. Using this
principle he created the ﬁrst modern geologic map in 1815. Sadly, other scientists were slow to
acknowledge Smith’s contribu ons because he was not an aristocrat, and some treated him
horribly. Eventually, they forced him into debtor’s prison and then into homelessness.
Thankfully, a noble employer helped right those wrongs. Today, Smith is known for having
produced ‘the map that changed the world’ and the principle of fossil succession, which
indicates that fossil pa erns in successions of sedimentary layers are predictable across broad
areas and some mes across Earth. These pa erns result from changes in the organisms that
inhabited Earth through me and can be used to identify sedimentary layers of the same age.
Together, the principles of rela ve dating allow humanity to determine the sequence of events
that comprise the history of Earth, in individual areas and across the planet. During the 1800s
and early 1900s humanity used these principles to correlate local histories from across the
planet and produce the Geologic Time Scale of Figure 3.16, which outlines the history of events
recorded by Earth. Today, the me scale con nues to be reﬁned as scientists make new
discoveries.

Figure 3.16. The Geologic Timescale and the eons, eras, periods, epochs, and ages that
comprise it (Ma=Mya; from GSA). Compare to Figure 3.8.

4
Dating Earth Events 

As humanity began to develop the principles of rela ve dating and to discover Earth’s extensive
history, some religious thinkers were trying to establish Earth’s birth date. For example, in the
1600s Archbishop James Usher used a few verses of Genesis and numerous assump ons to
assert that Earth formed at nigh all the evening before Sunday, October 23, 4004 BC. Ussher’s
chronology became widely accepted and appeared in the margins of several prin ngs of the
King James Bible. Although a several-thousand-year-old Earth appealed to the dogma sts of
that me (and sadly, to some today) the notion was quickly falsiﬁed by observations of Earth.
Today, geologists use natural clocks to date Earth events. These clocks ‘start cking’ when an
event occurs, accumulate ‘ cks’ at constant rate, and leave a record of the number of ‘ cks’
that pass between the event and the present. Although many natural processes show the
passage of me, only those few that ‘ ck’ at constant rate can be used as natural clocks.
‘Growth Band Clocks’ rely on natural processes that deposit new layers of material at regular
intervals. The annual layers formed in trees, animal shells, caves, and glacial lakes make
excellent growth band clocks, as illustrated in Figure 3.17. These clocks provide excellent
records of me, from today to nearly one million years ago. scientists test the validity of these
clocks by comparing them to each other and by using mul ple clocks to date the same event.

Figure 3.17. Photos of growth band clocks. The light colored layers form during the summer.
(Author illustration, photos from Wikimedia)
‘Age Markers’ are another tool used to help mark me. Rather than recording absolute ages,
these important tool ‘mark’ regional or global horizons of equivalent me. In conjunction with
other clocks, age markers allow humanity to bracket the age of materials they could not
otherwise date. Useful age markers include regional layers of volcanic ash, speciﬁc fossils or
fossil associations, and speciﬁc compositions of ice, sediment, or rock layers (Figure 3.18).

5

Figure 3.18. Images showing various age markers. Le : Volcanic ash layer in a glacial ice core
and evolu on of Ammonoid shell shape through me. Right: Alternating of Earth’s magne c
orientation through me (black is normal polarity; today at right) and plot of oxygen isotopes
through me (red represents warmer climate; today at le ). (Author illustration, images
modiﬁed from Wikimedia)
Another important group of natural clocks relies on constantly occurring transitions between
‘parent’ and ‘daughter’ components. These ‘Compositional Clocks’ allow scientists to calculate
specimen (event) ages by measuring decay rates and observing the propor on of parent and
daughter components. Examples of these clocks include the amino acid clock, luminescence
clock, and radiometric dating (Figure 3.19). The ﬁrst clock dates the death of an organism using
postmortem changes to amino acids, and the second clock dates mineral burial using
accumulated radiation.

Figure 3.19. Images related to compositional clocks. Le : Illustration of mirror-image amino
acid molecules, which record the death of organisms. Middle: Photos of plain-light (top) and
luminescing (bo om) quartz grains, which record how long sediment is buried. Right: An
illustrated radioactive decay curve, which is used in dating the formation age of minerals and
rocks. (Author illustration, le and right images from Wikimedia; middle from Ri enour)
In contrast, radiometric dating typically measures material formation by observing the
propor on of radioactive parent and stable daughter isotopes. Decay rates of diﬀerent isotopes
vary from much less than a second to many billions of years. The constancy of individual decay
rates makes radiometric dating the most accurate, reliable, and widely applicable da ng

6 rates makes radiometric dating the most accurate, reliable, and widely applicable da ng
method. scientists demonstrate the validity of measured ages by dating events with mul ple
methods.
All natural clocks—growth band, age markers, and compositional—consistently witness that
Earth is profoundly ancient and has a complex, dynamic history.

identifying the Nature of Earth Events

In the 1700s a wealthy Sco sh physician named James Hu on developed a scientiﬁc
underpinning called uniformitarianism that allows humanity to interpret the nature of past
events. Hu on suggested that natural processes created rock bodies over vast periods of me.
Some mes summarized as ‘the present is the key to the past’, uniformitarianism asserts that
the laws (processes) governing nature have remained through me. Hu on’s asser on allows
humanity to interpret the products of past events (rocks) by matching them with the products
of processes that are happening today. For example, uniformitarianism indicates that ancient
rock bodies with a ributes like those produced by modern volcanoes originated from an
ancient volcano. Uniformitarianism has tremendous explanatory power.
If you’re struggling to understand how uniformitarianism helps humanity interpret the natural
world, consider it’s place in your life. You use it extensively, many mes each day. For example,
think about how you would interpret the following situation: you are watching a recording of
your family before you were born; you see them surrounding a screen, decked out in athle c
apparel and screaming joyfully. Can you see that your interpretation that the ‘good’ team just
scored or won is based on your observation of the celebration and your understanding of the
association between celebrations and athle c events? In this and other ways, you use
uniformitarianism whenever you interpret the past or present, make a decision, or plan for the
future.
Notably, natural processes are far more reliable than human behavior. Although
people usually behave in certain ways, atoms, rocks, and planets always follow the natural laws
that govern them. As such, our interpretations of molecules, mountains, and solar systems are
very certain. Strangely, some modern people use uniformitarianism successfully in their own
lives and accept its use in society (as in in solving crimes), but they believe that it cannot be
used successfully to interpret Earth’s past.
Humanity’s modern interpretations of past Earth events rely on observations of the structure
and composition of Earth materials to interpret the processes that formed or modiﬁed those
materials. The structure of Earth materials describes the geometric relationships between rock
bodies and between their component parts. The composition of Earth Materials describes the
types of materials that comprise the rock and their elemental and isotopic makeup. The
processes that form or modify materials are the natural events that cause materials to
originate and change from one state or conﬁguration to another.
Geoscientists primarily use structure to determine the sequence of events and composition to

7
Geoscientists primarily use structure to determine the sequence of events and composition to
identify preexisting states and the processes that modify materials. For example, natural
processes like melting and solidiﬁcation result in solid mantle rock becoming magma and then
forming a solidiﬁed lava ﬂow on the surface.
Accurately interpreting the rock record requires extensive knowledge of Earth materials and the
natural processes that modify them. That is not our goal here. Instead, we
illustrate how humanity interprets Earth materials using these very basic natural pa erns:
● Igneous Rocks and features (like lava ﬂows and volcanoes) form as magma (liquid rock, lava)
solidiﬁes inside or on Earth’s surface. Magma forms inside Earth where tectonic processes
par ally melt solid rock. As a result, igneous rocks record the presence of past magma/lava
and the tectonic processes that produced it.
● Sedimentary rocks and features (like shale, sandstone, limestone, and the structures they
contain) form where sediment is deposited in par cular environments. These depositional
environments, illustrated in Figure 3.7, include beaches, lakes, and dune ﬁelds. Each
environment deposits sediments in unique ways. As such, sedimentary rocks record the
type and nature of the sedimentary environment in which they formed.
● Metamorphic rocks and features (like slate, schist, gneiss, and the structures they contain)
form from other rocks that are subjected to elevated temperatures and pressures. On
continents, metamorphism typically occurs as rock bodies are buried by the tectonic
processes that form mountain belts. As a result, continental metamorphic rocks record how
mountain belts and continental crust form and develop.
● Erosional surfaces form in areas where surface rock bodies are removed by weathering and
erosion. As such, erosional surfaces identify periods of ancient erosion.
● Faults and lted sedimentary rocks form where tectonic processes produce stresses
(pressures) that break and deform rock bodies. As a result, faults and lted sedimentary
rocks record the tectonic causes of past deformational events.
Using these and other materials and features, geologists can interpret rocks from a par cular
me to create maps of Earth’s ancient surface, such as those in Figures 3.12-3.14.

Can We Really Know?

Although you may not realize it, nearly everything you do aﬃrms the reality of humanity’s
ability to understand and interpret Earth’s history. For example, the iron in your car and the fuel
used to propel it were both extracted from Earth. Finding and extracting resources like these
requires that humanity understand the nature, governing processes, and history of Earth. The
next me you drive a car or use a cell phone, consider that those activi es would be impossible
if humanity did not understand how to learn about Earth.
Are you starting to look at the rock bodies that surround you any diﬀerently? For example, have
you begun to see how humanity can ‘read’ this important form of natural scripture? We hope
so.
