3.3 Wanna Date? 
Radioactivity and The Age Of Earth
Dr. Dan Moore and Dr. Brian Tonks, Geology and Physics Departments, BYU-Idaho

What more can we require? Nothing but me.— James Hu on

Learning Objectives:
● Understand and be able to identify each of the following: element, isotope, radioactive, radioactive
isotope, stable isotope, parent isotope, daughter isotope, probability of decay, and half-life.
● Understand why some isotopes are stable and others are radioactive and why some radioactive
isotopes decay more quickly than others.
● Determine the number of half-lives that have passed given the propor on of parent and daughter
atoms or a point on the radioactive decay curve. Also, determine the radiometric age of a specimen,
given the number of half-lives that have passed.
● Know Earth’s age and why humanity’s conﬁdence in this age is high.

Time is a simple four-le er word and permeates nearly every aspect of our existence. For
example, it’s rare for us to be far from the clocks in cell phones, watches, and computers. Also,
much of what we say includes references to me—“I’m going to …” or “I just …”. On the
surface, me seems easy to understand. However, on closer inspection we discover that me is
much more expansive, deep, and strange than it seems.
Thinking cri cally about me requires considering foundational concepts like sequence,
duration, rate, and cyclicity. Sequence relates to the ordering of events while duration describes
the interval ‘length’ between events. Sequences allow us to describe cause-and-eﬀect
relationships and the temporal structure of nature. In addition, rates of processes indicate how
quickly change occurs, and cyclicity describes recurring change. scientists use these concepts to
describe and measure me.
Human ability to accurately measure me has evolved. Aristotle believed me was
unimportant, in part because humanity could not yet measure me accurately. During the
Middle Ages monks began using inaccurate mechanical clocks to regulate monas c life. Then,
by the 1600s, accurate clocks allowed me to be included in Newton’s laws of motion and
gravity. A er Newton, humanity con nued to develop ever more accurate mekeepers.
Recently, humanity has used oscillations in cooled atoms to create an unfathomably accurate
clock, which is so precise that it would ‘lose’ less than a second in 15 billion years.
Although modern clocks accurately measure me in the present, they cannot record
unobserved periods in the past. As you know, natural clocks rely on rate-constant processes

2
unobserved periods in the past. As you know, natural clocks rely on rate-constant processes
that record ‘ cks’ as me passes. Of these, radiometric dating is the most accurate, reliable,
and widely applicable. It is also the least intui ve for those unfamiliar with the workings of
atomic nuclei and the immensity of deep me. To help you understand isotopic da ng, we
explore the nature, functioning, and reliability of radioactive decay below.

The Nature of Radioactive Decay

Elements are atoms with speciﬁc numbers of protons, and isotopes are elements with speciﬁc
numbers of neutrons. Stars form atomic nuclei with many combinations of protons and
neutrons. Some of the isotopes made by stars are stable and others are unstable. When
unstable or radioactive isotopes decay, they produce radiation.
The element carbon illustrates these ideas. All carbon atoms have 6 protons. Carbon consists of
one radioactive isotope known as carbon-14 (which contains 8 neutrons) and two stable
isotopes (known as carbon-12 and -13, containing 6 and 7 neutrons respectively). Carbon-14 is
radioactive because a nucleus containing 6 protons and 8 neutrons is unstable. This instability
ensures that carbon-14 eventually splits apart.
Radioactivity is an observational reality that results when radioactive parent isotopes
spontaneously break down (decay) to form daughter isotopes. The rate of radioactive decay can
be expressed as a decay probability or a half-life. The probability of decay describes how likely
a nucleus will decay, and a half-life is the me required to produce equal propor ons of parent
and daughter atoms, from an ini al state composed en rely of parent atoms. Highly unstable
nuclei have high probabili es of decay and short half-lives (some far-shorter than a second). In
contrast, rela vely stable radioactive isotopes have low probabili es of decay and long half-lives
(some extending to billions of years).
To illustrate, carbon-14 has a high probability of decay and a short half-life (just 5730 years). In
contrast, rela vely stable potassium-40 has a low probability of decay and a long half-life (1.251
billion years). The half-life of radioactive isotopes determines their useful range as clocks. Many
are useful between ~1/10,000 and ~10 half-lives. For example, C-14 can measure ages between
~500 ya and ~50 kya, and K-40 can date events older than ~15 kya.
Here’s the counterintui ve part about radioactivity: The same propor on of nuclei—not the
same number of nuclei—always decay in the same period. Moreover, it is impossible to predict
when any one radioactive atom will decay, but we can predict with tremendous accuracy the
number of atoms that will decay in a given period. Um, what?
Fortunately for our physical intuition, radioactive decay follows the same probabilistic ‘law’ as
dice, about which most humans have good intuition. Recall that for dice it is impossible to
predict the number an individual die will display when rolled, but it is easy to predict the
numbers of ‘ones’, ‘twos’, … that will appear a er many rolls. This apparent paradox results
from the probabilistic nature of dice. With each roll, the probability of a par cular number
appearing is always 1-in-6, or 16.67%. No matter how many mes a die has been rolled, a new

3
appearing is always 1-in-6, or 16.67%. No matter how many mes a die has been rolled, a new
roll always has a 1-in-6 chance of producing a par cular number. This ﬁxed probability (1/6) is
the reason it is easy to predict the propor on of ‘ones’, ‘twos’, … that will appear a er many
rolls. So, ﬁnding the number of ‘ones’ will appear in six million rolls, is easy: it’s 1/6th of 6 million,
or 1 million. Make sense?
Unlike dice, unstable atoms require no external agent. The constant motion of neutrons and
protons inside the nucleus provide con nuous opportuni es for decay. What’s more, although
rolling a million dice seems like a lot, there are huge numbers of atoms in even small amounts
of matter. For example, a single die contains more than a trillion trillion atoms.
Despite these diﬀerence, in many important respects radioactive atoms behave just like rolled
dice. For example, whether an atom decays in a par cular moment has no eﬀect on whether it
will decay in the next moment. This happens because the probability of decay remains constant
for each ‘roll of the atom’ (un l, of course, it decays). Said another way, individual radioactive
atoms do not have ﬁxed life mes—they have ﬁxed decay probabili es.
As you can now see, although the probabilistic character of dice and radioactive nuclei make
them counterintui ve at ﬁrst glance, once you understand how they work the apparent
paradoxes evaporate.

How Radioactive Dating Works

Quite commonly, religious people looking for a way around Earth’s an quity focus their scru ny
on radioactive da ng. These individuals o en reason that inconsistencies between young-Earth
interpretations of wri en scripture and ancient-Earth witnesses of natural scripture result from
variable decay rates or other problems with radioactive decay. Whether they realize it or not,
those who discount the u lity of radiometric dating place themselves in opposition to truth—to
nature as it actually is. Why? Because abundant observations indicate that radioactive decay
rates are constant and the ages recorded by radioactive decay are reliably accurate.
In addition to directly observing the radioactive decay of unstable isotopes with short half-lives,
scientists have made numerous additional observations that fail to falsify the validity of
radioactive clocks. For example, they have tested the constancy of decay rates by exposing
radioactive atoms to physical conditions far more extreme than those found on Earth, by using
mul ple natural clocks to date the same event, and by making clever observations of naturally
radioactive environments. These abundant tests clearly witness that half-lives are constant.
Moreover, scientists have discovered that supernovae and naturally radioactive environments
allow humanity to directly observe half-lives in the past.
Supernova 1987A (Figure 3.20) lies 168,000 lightyears from Earth, and radioactive decay
produced much of the light it generated. scientist were able to directly observe decay rates
168,000 years ago by studying the dimming of speciﬁc wavelengths of light from this supernova.
Moreover, scientists were able to directly observe half-lives in a 1.7-billion-year-old nuclear
‘reactor’ on Earth (in Gabon, Africa), by studying the composition of reactor products.

4
‘reactor’ on Earth (in Gabon, Africa), by studying the composition of reactor products.
Importantly, these and similar observations were unable to falsify the constancy of radioactive
decay rates.

Figure 3.20. Photo of a star (arrow) just and a er it exploded to produce supernova 1987A.
(Adapted from NASA)
Unrelen ngly constant decay rates make radioactive isotopes excellent natural clocks. To
understand how scientists use radioactive decay to measure the age of a geologic event,
imagine a crystal growing as ancient magma cooled. As this crystal grew, it incorporated small
quan es of radioactive parent atoms but no daughter atoms. Once solidiﬁed, the crystal
became a kind of me capsule. As me passed, parent isotopes inside the crystal decayed to
daughter isotopes according to the half life of the radioactive isotope.
Imagine now that much later a geoscientist separates the crystal from the rock and measures
the ra o of parent and daughter atoms in the crystal. These measurements indicate the
number of half-lives that passed since the crystal formed, and this measurement gives the age
of the crystal. The relationship (between radioactive parent isotopes, stable daughter isotopes,
and half-life) used to calculate the age is illustrated in Figure 3.21.

Figure 3.21. Illustration of radioactive decay through me. Note that half of the existing parent
isotopes decay during each half-life. (Author Illustration)
Real measurements are more complex than those illustrated in Figure 3.21, but they follow the
same pa ern. For example, the number of half-lives recorded by real crystals are rarely whole
numbers. More commonly, they are decimal fractions like 0.000041 or 6.7192. (Of course, such
decimal fractions can also be expressed as fractions, percentages, or ra os.) Radioactive age

5 decimal fractions can also be expressed as fractions, percentages, or ra os.) Radioactive age
determinations become more complex when growing crystals incorporate both parent and
daughter atoms. The additional complexity requires diﬀerent but equally valid approaches.
(These are the so-called ‘direct-measurement of radiation’ and ‘isochron’ techniques.)
Despite these and other complications, scientists rou nely measure formation ages for geologic
materials with great accuracy and precision. For example, the ﬁrst solids in our Solar System
formed 4567.30 ± 0.16 Mya and the Little Cotionwood granite of Utah formed 29.75 ± 0.75
Mya. No ce that scientiﬁc ages include associated sta s cal uncertainty.
A set of mathema cal equations describe the decay of radioactive parent atoms, the passage of
half-lives, and the accumulation of stable daughter atoms. These quan ta ve relationships are
represented graphically in Figure 3.22. Note that measurements of percent parent atoms
remaining (or daughter atoms accumulated) determines the elapsed me (as measured in half-
lives), and mul plying the ‘number of half-lives elapsed since formation’ mes the half-life gives
the formation age of the material.

Figure 3.22. A plot of me (half-lives elapsed since formation) verses percent of parent isotope.
The crystals illustrate the decay of parent atoms and the accumulation of daughter atoms.
(Wikimedia)

The Age of Earth

Observing that Earth is ancient is straigh orward. For example, annual layers in trees, glacial
lakes, and glaciers record ages up to ~60 kya. Likewise, the early molten Earth and fresh oceans
required many millions of years to cool and become salty. Humanity used simple observations
like these to discover Earth’s an quity long before we learned how to use radioactive clocks to

6 like these to discover Earth’s an quity long before we learned how to use radioactive clocks to
date past Earth events.
Today, modern instruments rou nely measure radioactive ages with extreme precision.
Uncertain es are typically less than 1%. Using radiometric da ng, we can bracket Earth’s age by
dating the materials from which Earth formed and the oldest known materials on Earth.
Examples of these materials are shown in Figure 3.23. In this way, we know that Earth could not
have formed before 4.57 Bya or a er 4.4 Bya. What’s more, the ages of the oldest specimens
from the Moon, Mars, and asteroids likewise witness that our solar system and the planets it
contains formed during this period.

Figure 3.23. Photos of ancient rocks that help bracket Earth’s age. Le : A thumb-sized
meteorite containing the ﬁrst materials to solidify from the collapsing globule that formed our
Solar System. These white irregularly-shaped grains are 4.567 Bya. Middle: A ﬁst-sized
specimen containing zircon crystals that formed 4.4 Bya in what is now western Australia. These
crystals are Earth’s oldest known materials. Right: A hand-sized specimen of Earth’s oldest
known rock body, which formed 4.01 Bya in what today is northwest Canada. (Author
photographs)
Helpful as they are, constraints provided by the oldest materials from Earth, Moon, Mars, and
meteorites do not indicate Earth’s actual age. Fortunately, comparing the isotopic compositions
of materials in Earth and primi ve meteorites provides an answer. This important approach
indicates that the materials that formed Earth separated from our proplyd by 4.54 Bya. Today,
despite more than half a century of tes ng, humanity has been unable to falsify this ‘separation
age’ for Earth.
In our experience, most who believe that Earth is young care little about Earth’s age. What
most are trying to say when they dogma cally assert Earth’s youth is this: “God created Earth!”.
These individuals o en perceive that they must choose God or science, revealed or discovered
truth, radiometric dating or wri en scripture. Impressively, most readily accept Earth’s an quity
once they understand the correct nature of and relationship between revealed and discovered
truth.
In case it’s not already clear, the witness of natural scripture is unequivocal: Earth is ancient. It
formed as part of our Solar System ~4.54 Bya.