3.4 A Rocky Start
Forming Earth and Its Component Systems
Dr. Dan Moore and Dr. Brian Tonks, Geology and Physics Departments, BYU-Idaho

The most erroneous stories are those we think we know best—and therefore never scrutinize or
ques on. —Steven Jay Gould

Learning Objecitves:
● Understand and be able to identify each of the following: accre on, diﬀeren a on, meteorite,
undiﬀerentiated meteorite, diﬀerentiated meteorite, iron meteorite, stony meteorite, stony-iron
meteorite; and components of habitability—magnetic ﬁeld, rocky mantle and crust, liquid
hydrosphere, gaseous atmosphere, biosphere, and Moon.
● Describe how accre on and diﬀeren a on produced the components of habitability. Also, describe
how each component supports habitability.

News ﬂash: We live on a habitable planet. Many take this for granted. However, increasingly
detailed study of solar systems suggests that planets where lawful processes produce and
nurture complex life are relatively rare.
What’s more, early Earth was a very diﬀerent place than our modern garden home, as
illustrated in Figure 3.24. In fact, Earth has been habitable by animals for only the last ~14% of
it’s existence. During Earth’s infancy, natural processes produced the founda ons of Earth’s
habitability. These processes formed Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld, rocky mantle and crust, liquid
hydrosphere, gaseous atmosphere, and moon. As we’ll discover, interactions between these
component systems eventually made Earth habitable.

Figure 3.24. Illustra on of the young molten Earth, and a photo of Earth today. (Wikimedia)

2

Early Solar System Solids

Earlier we learned that our Solar System formed from a protoplanetary disk like the one in
Figure 3.25. Our developing proplyd a racted ma er from the surrounding nebula. This ma er
became superheated when it ‘struck’ our proplyd. This heatingvaporized most preexis ng
solids and reset most radioacitve clocks. Subsequent cooling then allowed the ﬁrst solids in our
Solar System to form (Figure 3.23). The ages of these materials indicate that our proplyd
formed ~4.57 Bya.
The Sun records the composition of our proplyd. Our proplyd consisted mostly of hydrogen and
helium gas, plus minor amounts of numerous other elements and molecules. In the proplyd,
heavy elements like iron, magnesium, and silicon combined with oxygen to form dust-sized
grains of rock, and elements like iron and nickel formed small grains of metal. The warmest
regions of the proplyd were near the growing star. Farther from the sun (beyond the frost line)
the proplyd was cool enough for water, methane, and other molecules to form small ice grains.
Thus, the proplyd consisted of gas and dust, with rock and metal dust distributed uniformly and
ice dust concentrated beyond the frost line.

Figure 3.25. Illustra on of our Solar System during the early proplyd stage. (Author illustra on)

Accre on 

Recall that accre on is the incremental growth process that produces planetary bodies by
collision of orbitingsolids. Through accre on, dust in our proplyd formed larger objects—ﬁrst
pebbles, then rocks and boulders, and eventually asteroids, planets, and comets. Figure 2.42
illustrates the period when accre on produced planets in our Solar System.
To date, humanity has been unable to falsify the scien ﬁc theory (nebular theory) that explains
how planetary bodies in our Solar System formed. Why? Because this theory explains the

3
how planetary bodies in our Solar System formed. Why? Because this theory explains the
characteris cs of our Solar System very well. Even so, humanity con nues to reﬁne our
understanding by studying planetary systems near and far. In addition to the ordered a ributes
we explored earlier, nebular theory explains the the origin of the gas giant planets and their
moons, the development of comets and asteroids, and the cratered surfaces of airless inacitve
bodies like the Moon and Mercury.
These heavily cratered surfaces record the ﬁnal accre onary collisions that formed these
bodies. In contrast, the lack of craters on bodies such as Earth and Venus record their con nual
resurfacing by geologic ac vity. Although craters are rare on Earth today, they were common in
its youth. At that me, Earth’s surface looked similar to the Moon’s surface today. Planetary
bodies in our Solar System record collisions of all sizes. Several planetary bodies, including
Earth, record colossal impacts between large bodies. Our Moon formed from such collisions.
A er the planets formed, rates of collisions decreased over the next ~500 My as the planets
swept up most of the solids near their orbits. Later gravita onal interactions (mostly with
Jupiter) con nued sca ering debris into the paths of the planets. The process of accre on
con nues today, but at tremendously low rate. Presently, Earth accretes only ~50,000 tons of
new solid ma er each year. So the next time you see a ‘shootingstar’, remember that accre on
is real and that you live in The Ongoing Crea on of Earth.
In recent decades, humanity has developed the ability to observe planets around other stars. To
date, astronomers have observed several thousand such planets, and with improved telescopes
the number of will soon reach several hundred thousand. Observing the a ributes of these
planetary systems allows humanity to test and further develop nebular theory. In the process,
human understanding of how planetary systems form is progressing line upon line as we
upgrade from preparatory truth to preparatory truth—just as it must if we are ever to have a
perfect understanding of how planets and their systems form. Isn’t it cool that humanity
understands so much about how solar systems and planets form, and that we’re on the verge of
discovering so much more?!

Diﬀeren a on

As accre on progressed, planetary bodies formed from available solids. Inside the frost line,
these bodies contained ﬁnely intermixed rock and metal. Farther out they consisted mostly of
ices, with minor intermixed rock and metal. Where collisions and radioacitve decay provided
suﬃcient heat (mostly near the Sun), dense metal inside primi ve planetesimals separated
from less-dense rock in a process called diﬀeren a on.
This density separa on or chemical ‘unmixing’ produced layered planetary bodies with metallic
cores surrounded by rocky mantles and crusts, as illustrated in Figure 3.26. Where conditions
were favorable, diﬀeren a on also produced solid ‘ice-spheres’ (cryospheres), liquid
hydrospheres, and gaseous atmospheres. Far from the Sun, where comets formed,
diﬀeren a on was relatively uncommon because heat from collisions and radioac vity were
less abundant.

4

Figure 3.26. Cross-section of a diﬀerentiated planetary body—with a metallic core, rock mantle,
and rocky crust. (Author illustra on)
In the Asteroid Belt, Jupiter’s inﬂuence prevented planetesimals from forming a planet. As a
result, the Asteroid Belt preserves the building blocks of planets, including both primi ve
(undiﬀerentiated) and evolved (diﬀerentiated) planetary bodies. Through the eons,
gravita onal interactions have caused rocks from the asteroid belt (and less commonly from
other bodies like Moon and Mars) to collide with Earth. We call these space rocks meteorites.
Basic meteorite types are shown in Figure 3.27. Undiﬀerentiated meteorites are space rocks
composed of primi ve solids that formed in the early Solar System. They consist of ﬁnely
intermixed rock and metal. In contrast, diﬀerentiated meteorites are space rocks that formed
as part of the crust, mantle, or core of a planetary body. We refer to those that originated in a
core as iron meteorites, those that formed at a core-mantle boundary as stony-iron
meteorites, and those that formed in a mantle or crust as stony meteorites.

Figure 3.27. Photos of thumb-to-hand-sized undiﬀerentiated and diﬀerentiated meteorites.
Each of these meteorites fell to Earth a er being ejected from their parent asteroid by
collisions. (Author photographs)
Undiﬀerentiated meteorites are the most common type to collide with Earth today, likely
because a relatively recent collision fragmented an undiﬀerentiated asteroid. Undiﬀerentiated
planetesimals are the startingmaterial from which the layered (diﬀerentiated) planetesimals
and planets formed. Diﬀerentiated meteorites record abundant informa on about their parent
bodies. For example, iron meteorites indicate that they formed inside asteroids similar in size to
those found in the Asteroid Belt today.

5

Forming the Components of Earth’s Habitability

Earth—like Mercury, Venus, and Mars—is a fully diﬀerentiated planet. Diﬀeren a on is
cri cally important to the habitability of Earth. Observa ons of planetary materials indicate that
Earth’s layers (metallic core, rocky mantle and crust, liquid hydrosphere, and gaseous
atmosphere) originated no later than the Moon-forming giant impact at ~4.51 Bya, about 30
My a er Earth formed.
Heat from accre on, radioac vity, diﬀeren a on, and the forma on of the Moon made early
Earth incredibly hot. This heat generated at least three periods in which Earth’s surface
consisted of a deep magma ocean (Figure 3.24). This ﬁery birth laid the founda on for Earth’s
eventual habitability because it produced Earth’s component systems—its Moon, magnetic
ﬁeld, rocky mantle and crust, solid ice-sphere (cryosphere), liquid hydrosphere, gaseous
atmosphere, and biosphere. In me, energy from Earth’s interior and the Sun drove
interactions between these systems. These interactions produced Earth’s climate system and
made Earth habitable.
Our Magnetic Field
Earth’s core makes up more than half of its radius and consists mostly of iron and nickel (plus a
few percent of light elements like silicon, carbon, and sulfur and small amounts of other metals
like pla num and gold). The core contains a solid inner sphere surrounded by a thick layer of
molten metal. These metallic layers and Earth’s spin produce a magnetic ﬁeld that surrounds
our planet in a protecitve shield. Without this shield, solar radia on would strip away Earth’s
atmosphere and make Earth uninhabitable. Incidentally, the auroras (the northern and
southern lights) occur when intense solar radia on par ally penetrate Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld
and collide with molecules in the upper atmosphere.
So, if you’re a fan of science ﬁction and long to zip through the galaxy in a spaceship protected
by an invisible force ﬁeld, you’re in luck. At this very moment, you’re traveling on spaceship
Earth at immense speed through the Solar System and galaxy—all the while protected by
Earth’s mostly-invisible magnetic ﬁeld. Reality is so cool, isn’t it?!
Rocky Mantle and Crust
Earth’s core is surrounded by two layers of solid rock, the crust and mantle. By volume, Earth is
~1% crust, ~84% mantle, and ~15% core. Crustal rock is less dense than mantle rock, which is
why the crust forms our planet’s surface. Figure 3.28 shows a piece of Earth’s primi ve crust.
As you know, the slow ﬂow of solid rock drives tectonic changes like volcanoes, earthquakes,
and plate mo on. Surface cooling and internal heat drive this slow convecitve ﬂow. Earth’s
tectonically acitve crust and mantle support habitability by creatingcon nental and oceanic
crust, forming mountain ranges and sedimentary basins, producing volcanoes, and modera ng

6
crust, forming mountain ranges and sedimentary basins, producing volcanoes, and modera ng
Earth’s climate. More on this later.

Figure 3.28. A palm-sized piece of ancient crust from northwestern Australia. (Author
photograph)
Hydrosphere and Atmosphere
Outside the crust and mantle lie Earth’s least dense, outermost material layers—the
hydrosphere and atmosphere. Although they represent a ny fraction of Earth’s mass, these
layers play a supersized role in planetary habitability. For example, atmospheric carbon
modulates Earth’s climate and liquid water is among the most important requirements for life.
Can you think of other important functions? If not, stop breathing and you’ll quickly remember
at least one more.
The Moon
Although our large Moon is not physically connected to Earth, its ‘gravita onal’ inﬂuence
stabilizes Earth’s lt. In this way, the Moon protects Earth from the lt-altering gravita onal
tugs of giant planets like Jupiter, which would otherwise dras cally diminish the habitability of
Earth by cyclically producing huge seasonal varia ons in important climate variables like
temperature.

Figure 3.29. Early Earth and Moon shortly a er the giant impact. Note the arc of material from
which the Moon is forming by accre on. (Author illustra on)

7

Figure 3.29 shows the Moon forming around Earth at ~4.51 Bya. The a ributes of Moon and
Earth are best explained by giant impacts between early Earth and several large planetesimals.
This ‘giant impact’ hypothesis was ﬁrst developed in the 1970s by William Hartmann and Don
Davis following extensive study of the Moon and its materials. By the mid 1990s, compe ng
hypotheses for the forma on of Moon had been falsiﬁed. Today, although there is much s ll to
learn about the Moon, the giant impact explana on is a scien ﬁc theory because it has
withstood all observa onal tests.
Biosphere
As we’ll discuss later, living things are complex organic systems that persist, act with purpose,
reproduce, and evolve. A er Earth cooled suﬃciently, single-celled organisms like those in
Figure 3.30 developed and dominated. Earth’s biosphere consists of all living things.

Fig 3.30. Paintingof early Earth showing knobby bacterial pillars (stromatolites) along a shallow
coastline (le ), and a palm-sized slice of Earth’s oldest known stromatolite fossil (from Strelley
Pool, western Australia). The wavy layers of sediment in the ﬁst-sized stromatolite sample were
trapped by bacterial mats 3.4 Bya. (Author illustra on and photograph)
Many individuals consider the biosphere as a passenger on spaceship Earth, taking what it
needs from Earth but having li le impact on the planet. Not true! The biosphere has had
tremendous impact on Earth and has in turn been tremendously changed by it. For example, the
atmospheric oxygen required by animals was ﬁrst produced by the biosphere (by single-celled
photosynthe c organisms). The progressive emergence of modern levels of atmospheric
oxygen, which revolutionized Earth, forms an important chapter in the development of Earth’s
habitability.
To summarize, planets like Earth form within protoplanetary disks as small solid par cles
aggregate into larger bodies. Our Sun and its system of planets formed from a proplyd between
~4.56 and ~4.54 Bya.

8
During and following the accre on of Earth, diﬀeren a on produced Earth’s component
systems. In me, complex interactions between these systems made Earth habitable. So, if you
haven’t expressed gra tude recently for Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld, mantle, crust, hydrosphere,
atmosphere, or Moon, consider doing so now. Your existence on Earth would be impossible
without them.
