3.5 A Breath of Fresh Air
OxygenatingEarth
Dr. Dan Moore and Dr. Brian Tonks, Geology and Physics Departments, BYU-Idaho

The history of any one part of the Earth, like the life of a soldier, consists of long periods of
boredom and short periods of terror. —Derek V. Ager

Learning Objecitves:
● Describe the oxygen content and basic character of Earth’s atmosphere during these states and the
transitions that separate them: State 1 - Oxygen Free (early Precambrian), 1st Transition (mid
Precambrian), State 2 - Oxygen Poor (The Boring Billion, late Precambrian), 2nd Transition (late
Precambrian), and Modern State - Oxygen-rich (Phanerozoic).
● Describe how each transition cooled climate suﬃciently to produce a ‘Snowball Earth’ episode.

Even though many take Earth’s modern habitability for granted, most are fascinated to discover
the intricately lawful processes that made Earth habitable. A er all, who isn’t interested in what
allows them to exist.
When it comes to habitability, Earth’s atmosphere takes center stage. Not only does it hold life-
giving oxygen for animals like humans, but it plays a central role in Earth’s climate system.
Interactions between Earth’s systems determine the abundance of atmospheric oxygen and
carbon, as illustrated in Figure 3.31. We refer to interactions and processes that add material to
the atmosphere as sources and those that remove material as sinks.

Figure 3.31. Cartoon showing how interactions between systems change atmospheric
composition by adding or removing molecules like free oxygen (O 2) and carbon dioxide (CO 2).
(Author illustra on)
The composition of Earth’s modern atmosphere is not normal for a terrestrial planet. If the
atmosphere were in equilibrium with solid Earth, it would contain almost no free oxygen. It
would also contain noxious gases such as methane, carbon monoxide, and carbon dioxide.

2
would also contain noxious gases such as methane, carbon monoxide, and carbon dioxide.
Earth’s modern atmosphere lies far from equilibrium, in large part because living things
constantly add free oxygen to the atmosphere. If these organisms stopped producing oxygen
today, Earth’s atmosphere would become ‘unbreathable’ in just a few thousand years.
Ancient Earth materials record that our modern oxygen-rich atmosphere developed from an
oxygen-poor atmosphere, which itself developed from an oxygen-free state. Figure 3.32
illustrates the dura ons and oxygen concentra ons of these three states and the two
transitions that separate them. Each of these states persisted for a very long me. The ﬁrst
state lasted ~2 By, the second ~1 By, and our modern state has existed since ~650 Mya or about
the last 14% of Earth’s history. Moreover, the transitions that separate these atmospheric states
were not rapid. The ﬁrst transition took ~600 My and the second ~200 My. Both of these
transitions caused major changes in the types and abundance of living things. For example, the
ﬁrst transition made much of Earth’s surface uninhabitable to certain single cell organisms
(anaerobes), and the second transition coincides with the emergence of mul cellular animals.

Figure 3.32. Plot of atmospheric oxygen levels through time showing major states and
transitions. (Adapted from Wikimedia)

State 1: An Oxygen-Free Atmosphere

The founda ons of Earth’s present atmosphere emerged ~4.51 Bya from gases released during
the giant Moon-forming impacts. Then, gases released by volcanic ac vity and impacts
con nued to source our developing atmosphere. Thus, Earth’s present atmosphere and
hydrosphere formed mostly from gases released from molten rock. What was the nature of this
early atmosphere?
Earth’s state 1 atmosphere was likely similar to the present atmospheres of Venus and Mars.
These atmospheres consist mostly of CO 2 (~96%), with minor nitrogen (~3.5%) and argon (~1%)
and trace amounts of other gases. They contain essen ally no free oxygen. The abundant and
eﬀecitve greenhouse gases in Earth’s early atmosphere eﬃciently trapped heat from solar
radia on. This heat kept Earth’s surface warm during the Sun’s early years when it produced
about one-third less energy than today.
Ini ally, Earth’s surface and atmosphere were too hot for oceans to form. During this period,

3
Ini ally, Earth’s surface and atmosphere were too hot for oceans to form. During this period,
the oceans existed mostly as water vapor (steam) in the atmosphere. However, once Earth’s
surface cooled below the boiling point of water, rain fell, and fell, and fell… for centuries,
perhaps for millennia. Earth’s oceans formed as rainwater ﬂowed into and ﬁlled the ocean
basins. Earth materials provide sugges ve evidence for liquid surface as early as ~4.4 Bya, but
deﬁni ve evidence for oceans doesn’t appear un l ~3.7 Bya. These earliest oceanic sediments
(from southeastern Greenland) contain chemical clues that may indicate the presence of life.
But the earliest conclusive evidence for life appears ~3.43 Bya in what is now northwestern
Australia. These fossils consist of layered sediment trapped by bacterial mats (like those shown
in Figure 3.30). These organisms thrived on a planet without persistent free oxygen.

Transition to the Second State: An Oxygen-Poor Atmosphere

By ~3.4 Bya, single-celled organisms had begun harvestingsunlight to power their lives.
However, modern oxygen-producing photosynthesis did not emerge un l two primi ve
photosynthe c processes combined in cyanobacteria at ~2.7 Bya. These modern
photosynthesizers used carbon dioxide and water to produce energy and make the materials
that formed their single-celled bodies. In addition, they released a poisonous byproduct—the
O 2 gas that caused Earth’s ﬁrst oxygen transition.
Earth’s 1st Oxygen Transition is some mes referred to as the ‘Great Oxida on Event or ‘First
Oxygen Revolution’. During this transition, newly-abundant oxygen producing organisms caused
atmospheric free oxygen to rise to ~1% of modern levels. This transition occurred during the
middle Precambrian and lasted ~600 million years.
If you look closely at ‘pond scum’, you can observe the oxygen-ﬁlled bubbles produced by
modern descendants of the early photosynthesizers (cyanobacteria) that produced Earth’s ﬁrst
oxygen revolution. What’s more, descendants of these early photosynthesizers are found inside
plant cells. In biology class you called these descendants ‘chloroplasts’. Did you know that, even
today, chloroplasts use their own DNA to replicate independently inside their host plant cells?
Clearly, humanity owes cyanobacteria two tremendous debts. Not only do they produce most
of the oxygen we breath, but they also power plant cells. So, the next time you encounter ‘pond
scum’, be sure to thank those organisms. Without them a breath would kill you and plants
would not exist.
Now, back to oxygen. The highly-reacitve oxygen (O 2) produced by photosynthesizers altered
Earth’s surface, cooled the planet, and changed the history of life. Recall that most early
organisms thrived in O 2-free environments. Thus, the genera on of free oxygen made vast
regions of Earth’s surface uninhabitable to most early single-celled organisms. In this way, the
Great Oxida on Event caused what is likely Earth’s largest mass ex nction. In the a ermath of
this mass die-oﬀ, biological innova ons produced organisms that could tolerate oxygen poison
—and later, produced organisms that thrived in oxygen-rich environments. These complex,
single-celled oxygen lovers, known as eukaryotes, emerged by ~2.1 Bya. Notably, all animals and
plants consist of eurkaryo c cells. This is why your body needs O 2 to survive.

4
In addition to irrevocably changing the trajectory of life, atmospheric free-oxygen changed
Earth’s surface forever, both on land and in water. Early O 2 destabilized ‘reducers’ like iron,
sulfur, and carbon that had been abundant at Earth’s surface for eons. As these reducers
combined with oxygen, they formed solid sediments that were removed from Earth’s surface by
burial, as illustrated in Figure 3.33. For example, dissolved iron had long been stable in Earth’s
oceans, but reaction with oxygen caused oceanic iron to precipitate. These iron-oxide-rich
sediments accumulated worldwide, producing the banded iron forma ons that are modern
humanity’s main source of iron (Figure 3.33).

Figure 3.33. Le : Cartoon illustratinghow reducers like iron reacted with O 2 and were buried as
iron-oxide-rich sediment. Right: Photo of a head-sized slab of banded iron forma on (BIF).
Without BIFs, our iron-based civiliza on could not exist. (Author illustra on and photograph)
In addition to reactingwith iron and other reducers, O 2 reacted with atmospheric hydrogen
(H 2), methane (CH 4), and ammonia (NH 4) gases. These reactions produced molecules like
carbon dioxide (CO 2), nitrogen (N 2), and water (H 2 O). As a result, Earth’s ‘state 2’ atmosphere
contained mostly nitrogen and carbon dioxide, with trace amounts of other gases like free
oxygen.
The oxida on of Earth’s atmosphere converted methane (CH 4) to carbon dioxide (CO 2). This
cooled global climate cooled because carbon dioxide is a much weaker greenhouse gas than
methane. This cooling was enhanced by the forma on of abundant carbon-bearing rock
(limestone and black shale) during this transition. This tremendous cooling produced a rare
Snowball Earth episode. Earth materials produced at this time record the presence of glaciers
at sea level at the equator, indicatingthat most of Earth’s surface was covered by ice.
Eventually, volcanic ac vity re-warmed Earth and ended this ‘snowball’ state—by adding carbon
dioxide to the atmosphere.
Later (by ~1.85 Bya) oxygen production by life and oxygen removal by oxida on and burial
reached a balance. This allowed free oxygen to stabilize to ~1% of modern levels, which ended
Earth’s ﬁrst oxygen transition and ini ated Earth’s state 2 atmosphere. We o en refer to this
period as the ‘boring billion’ because Earth’s ‘state 2’ atmosphere changed very li le over the
next ~1 By (Figure 3.32). During the boring billion, free-oxygen concentra ons were too low for
oxygen-loving eukaryotes to build persistent colonies. However, the rise of atmospheric oxygen
during Earth’s second oxygen revolution allowed these ‘persistent colonies of eukaryotes’ to
begin thriving. You know these cooperatingeukaryo c colonies by another name—animals.

5

Transition To the Third State: A Modern Oxygen-Rich Atmosphere

Earth’s modern atmosphere contains ~78% nitrogen and ~21% free oxygen, with trace amounts
of other gases like carbon dioxide and water. This modern state atmosphere emerged from
Earth’s 2nd Oxygen Transition, which lasted ~200 My (Figure 3.32). This transition resulted from
a period in which tectonic and biological processes buried enormous quan es of biologic
carbon, in the form of dead single-celled organisms.
The shallow seas in which these microorganisms thrived surrounded por ons of a dividing
supercon nent. The supercon nent Rodinia, which coalesced by ~1 Bya, began dividing ~750
Mya. As Rodinia split apart, the global abundance of coastlines grew. Along these coastlines,
river-delivered nutrients allowed oceanic microorganisms to thrive. When these organisms
died, they were eﬃciently buried by sediment from the same rivers that had fueled their
growth.
Recall that photosynthe c cyanobacteria use the carbon in CO 2 and the hydrogen in H 2 O to
build their bodies. In the process they release the O 2 gas that is poisonous to them. When
cyanobacteria die, this process reverses—free oxygen reacts with their bodies to produce
carbon dioxide and water. However, when burial occurs before reactingwith oxygen, levels of
atmospheric oxygen and the amount of buried carbon rise.
In this way, carbon burial acts as a kind of ‘atmospheric oxygen pump’. Thus, as carbon burial
proliferated in the coastlines that surrounded ri ing Rodinia, global levels of free oxygen
increased and the concentra on of atmospheric CO 2 fell. Rising oxygen produced our modern
atmosphere and facilitated the emergence of animal life, and falling carbon dioxide plunged the
planet into a vast global ice age, Earth second Snowball Earth episode. As before, carbon
dioxide released by volcanoes eventually re-warmed the planet and ended the second snowball
episode.

Figure 3.34. Illustrated reconstruction of the early animal community known as the ‘Edicaran
fauna’. Note the primi ve jellyﬁsh in the foreground. (Wikimedia)

6

As oxygen levels rose during the second transition, early animals like sponges and jellyﬁsh
emerged from colonies of communicatingeukaryo c cells. The earliest animals did not have
eﬃcient ways to circulate oxygen through their bodies. Instead, they relied on the slow
movement (diﬀusion) of oxygen from seawater into their cells. However, as oxygen levels rose,
more oxygen was available in seawater, and cells could incorporate this energy-giving substance
more eﬃciently. As a result, increased oxygen levels allowed the development of larger, thicker
bodies. The ﬁrst true community of animals appeared ~580 Mya, shortly a er Earth’s 2nd
Oxygen Transition. Figure 3.34 shows these early animals.
Compe on among the ﬁrst animals produced organisms with increasing complexity, including
sensory organs like eyes and antennae. Then, ~543 Mya mul cellular organisms developed the
ability to build hard parts using ma er extracted from seawater. This development allowed
successive animal genera ons to develop defensive and oﬀensive body parts like shells and
teeth. In addition, improved mechanisms for acquiring and moving oxygen (like gills and veins)
played important roles in the development of early animal communi es. For example, larger
mobile animals required ever more eﬃcient ways of acquiring, processing, and distribu ng
oxygen.
The ‘evolutionary arms race’ produced surviving genera ons of prey with be er camouﬂage,
more rapid locomo on, and heavier armor. These developments were counteracted by
successive genera ons of predators with stronger jaws, sharper teeth, and be er vision. More
on the development of life later.
As the discussion above illustrates, the rela onship between atmospheric oxygen and life is
fascina ng. Did you know, for example, that although oxygen fuels animal life it also ensures
animal death? Unfortunately, that is a story for another day. For now, remember to delay the
death-inducing eﬀects of oxygen by consuming an oxidants …but don’t forget to breathe.
In summary, the oxygen released by cyanobacteria produced Earth’s ﬁrst oxygen transition, and
the burial of unoxidized carbon drove the second transition. Both of these transitions spawned
global ice ages, and these Snowball Earth episodes ended when volcanic CO 2 re-warmed Earth.
In these and so many other ways, the emergence of atmospheric O 2 beau fully illustrates this
important principle: the development of life drama cally alters Earth and the development of
Earth drama cally alters life. So interes ng, and so cool!
Incidentally, so long as living things are present on Earth’s surface, free oxygen cannot rise
above ~30%. This upper limit was reached once in Earth’s history, when the ﬁrst true forests
emerged ~360 Mya. This episode, which we’ll discuss later, shows up as the large ‘hump’ on the
right of Figure 3.32.
