3.6 Where in The World is Carbon Sandiego?
The Basic Nature of Earth’s Climate System
Dr. Dan Moore and Dr. Brian Tonks, Geology and Physics Departments, BYU-Idaho

Our globe must be explained by the powers that are natural to the globe. —James Hution

Learning Objecitves:
● Understand and be able to identify each of the following: persistent climate states like runaway
greenhouse, greenhouse, icehouse, and runaway icehouse states; climate transitions; Earth’s
climate (carbon) thermostat and Earth’s climate system; carbon sources and sinks; and nega ve and
posi ve climate responses.
● Describe how the following natural processes aﬀect global climate: volcanic ac vity, forma on of
carbon-bearing rocks, destruction of carbon-bearing rocks, and mountain building.
● Understand the process(es) that prevent Earth from entering extreme climate states like the
runaway greenhouse and runaway icehouse states. Also, describe the natural processes responsible
for Earth’s transitions into and out of both Snowball Earth events.

Life is everywhere—in the soil, deep underground, and in the oceans and atmosphere.
Moreover, fossils record life’s persistence on Earth for at least 3.4 By, and possibly longer.
Despite the stupendous abundance of life on Earth, it is the only place where we currently
know life exists.
So, what makes Earth special? Why has liquid water persisted on Earth for more than 4 billion
years? Why is Earth a Goldilocks Planet—not too hot like Venus or too cold like Mars, but ‘just
right’? Is Earth’s special status a supernatural ‘act of God’ or are there natural processes that
maintain Earth’s climate within the narrow range required for the existence and persistence of
life?

Climate States

Despite being ‘just right’, Earth’s climate history is far from sta c. Instead, Earth materials
record essen ally constant climate change. What’s more, these records indicate that periods of
relatively li le change result from balance between opposing changes. Thus, even periods of
relatively constant climate involve constant change. In addition, Earth’s climate typically lies
near the boundaries of habitability. Said diﬀerently, Earth’s climate usually experiences
intermediate states only as it transition from a warm state to a cool state, or vice-versa.
As you’ll recall, local climate is long term average weather, and global climate averages all local
climates. Thus, persistent climate states are periods when global climate remains in one of the

2 climates. Thus, persistent climate states are periods when global climate remains in one of the
state illustrated in Figure 3.35. Greenhouse climate states occur when Earth climate is
habitable but persistently warm, as during most of the Mesozoic period. In contrast, icehouse
climate states occur when Earth climate is habitable but persistently cool, as during the last ~35
My.
The range of habitable temperatures for Earth—from the coldest habitable icehouse to ho est
habitable greenhouse—is ~35 o F (~20 o C). This temperature range may seem small but recall
that these are global temperatures, averaged over long periods. Imagine how the climate
where you live would change if summers and winters averaged ~35 o F (~20 o C) cooler or
warmer.

Figure 3.35. Planetary climate states. Planetary habitability persists in the so-called ‘Goldilocks’
zone. (Author illustra on)
As men oned, Earth’s climate tends to persist near the extremes—near the upper boundary of
the greenhouse state or the lower boundary of the icehouse state. If global temperatures
become too hot, liquid water boils and becomes steam, and if climate is too cold, liquid water
freezes and becomes ice. When essen ally all liquid water becomes steam or ice, a planet
enters runaway climate states from which recovery can be impossible.
Today, Venus is in the runaway greenhouse climate state. The surface water of Venus has
resided in its atmosphere for a very long me, perhaps since its forma on. Through me, solar
radia on has stripped the hydrogen from this atmospheric water, making it impossible for
Venus to form oceans again. In contrast, Mars is in the runaway icehouse climate state.
Essen ally all surface water on Mars is frozen and, like Venus, Mars has lost much of its water
(hydrogen) to space. Although Mars may have passed through an earlier habitable period, both
Venus and Mars are far from habitable today.
Observa ons of planets inside and outside our Solar System indicate that planetary habitability
is rare. Not only are most planets uninhabitable throughout their en re ‘life mes’, planets that

3 is rare. Not only are most planets uninhabitable throughout their en re ‘life mes’, planets that
pass through habitable periods do so brieﬂy relative to their lifespans. Even Earth—by far the
most habitable known planet, has been habitable by animals for only the last ~14% of its
history. Of course, a far larger propor on of planetary bodies are capable of sustaining single-
celled life. Our solar system contains at least four such bodies. What’s more, Earth has
supported single-celled life through at least 75% of its history.

How To Build A Habitable Planet

Although the systems, processes, and interactions that make a planet habitable are complex, an
introductory understanding lies within the reach of everyone. Imagine, for example, ﬁnding
comfort around a winter campﬁre with and without a blanket. Can you see that your level of
comfort would vary with distance from the ﬁre, and that you could be comfortable farther out if
covered by a blanket?
As with ‘comfortable distances’ for campﬁres and people, so it is for the habitable zones of
planets. This habitable zone is the range of distances from the central star that prevent
planetary surface water from completely vaporizing or freezing. Planetary habitable zones lies
closer in for cooler stars and farther out for ho er stars. Moreover, this distance is aﬀected by
the thickness of a planet’s atmospheric ‘blanket’, because greenhouse gases such as methane,
carbon dioxide, and water vapor trap heat near planetary surfaces. As such, the habitable zones
of planets lie nearer stars for planets with weaker greenhouse atmospheres and farther out for
those that strongly trap heat from sunlight.
So, Earth’s modern habitability results from a combina on of factors. These include the Sun’s
brightness, Earth’s orbital distance, and the nature and concentra on of atmospheric
greenhouse gases. Today, Earth’s surface averages a habitable 60 o F (15 o C). But without
greenhouse gases, Earth’s surface would be an uninhabitable 0 o F (-20 o C). These no ons—
orbital distance and greenhouse eﬀect—also explain the uninhabitable character of Venus,
Mars, and many other planetary bodies. For example, Venus’s thick greenhouse atmosphere
produces scorching surface temperatures of 900 o F (480 o C), but the surface of Venus would be
a manageable 70 o F (20 o C) without its atmosphere. On the other hand, a thicker greenhouse
atmosphere would be needed to make Mars habitable. Today, the surface of Mars averages
about -80 o F (-60 o C).
Although a wonderful place to live today, Earth could become uninhabitable in relatively short
order if the Sun’s brightness or Earth’s orbital a ributes changed dras cally. Fortunately, the
Sun’s brightness change very slowly and Earth’s orbit changes cyclically. These orbital
oscilla ons produce small but important ﬂuctua ons in Earth’s climate that we’ll discuss later.
Unlike solar brightness and Earth’s orbit, natural processes like volcanoes (and human ac vi es
like burning fuel) can warm or change global climate relatively quickly by altering greenhouse
gases. Earth’s main greenhouse gases are methane (CH 4), water vapor, and carbon dioxide.
Although methane likely modulated climate before the ﬁrst oxygen revolution, it is unstable in
the modern atmosphere. Likewise, Earth’s oceans ensure that varia ons in atmospheric water

4
the modern atmosphere. Likewise, Earth’s oceans ensure that varia ons in atmospheric water
vapor are small. In contrast, atmospheric CO 2 plays a supersized role in determining Earth’s
climate state because the concentra on of atmospheric carbon dioxide can vary widely.
In many ways, the natural processes that aﬀect atmospheric CO 2 act like a thermostat for Earth.
In your home, the thermostat maintains temperature within a set range by engaging a heater or
cooler. For example, the cooler removes heat when temperature rises above the set maximum,
and the heater raises temperature when the house becomes too cold. In this way, your home’s
thermostat ensures that the temperature never becomes ‘uninhabitable’ (uncomfortable). As
you’ll see below, this analogy provides keen insight into how natural processes have
spontaneously maintained the habitability of Earth through the eons—keeping it in the
Goldilocks zone, not too hot or cold …but ‘just right’.

Earth’s Carbon Thermostat 

Earth’s carbon thermostat is the set of natural processes that maintain planetary temperatures
within a habitable range. As illustrated in Figure 3.36, some of these natural processes are
carbon sources that move carbon from solid Earth to the atmosphere and warm climate.
Others are carbon sinks that move carbon from the atmosphere to solid Earth and cool climate.
These lawful processes comprise core components of Earth’s climate system.

Figure 3.36. Cartoon showing how sources like volcanoes move carbon to the atmosphere from
solid Earth and how sinks like burying carbon in rocks move carbon from the atmosphere to
solid Earth. (Author illustra on)
Although numerous natural processes act as carbon sources and sinks, the broad-scale
groupings we present in Figure 3.36 are suﬃcient to illustrate the general character of Earth’s
climate thermostat. Earth’s leading carbon sink is the forma on of C-bearing sediments/rocks.
The carbon in these sediments typically comes from dead organisms. During life,
photosynthe c organisms such as algae and plants use carbon dioxide from the atmosphere
and hydrosphere to form their bodies. When these organisms die, their carbon-rich ssues and
shells can be buried with and as sediment.
Carbon-bearing sediments eventually form solid rock bodies like limestone, coal, and shale.
Where carbon is suﬃciently abundant, these rock bodies provide sources of oil and natural gas.
Earth forms carbon-bearing rocks most rapidly when surface temperatures are high, near the
upper end of the greenhouse climate state. The forma on of carbon bearing sediments moves

5 upper end of the greenhouse climate state. The forma on of carbon bearing sediments moves
carbon from the atmosphere into solid Earth, which cools global climate.
Incidentally, buried carbon can be thought of as fossilized atmospheric carbon dioxide. Kind of
an interestingway to look at it, right? From this perspecitve, fossilized atmosphere forms the
founda on of our modern, carbon-based society. We use this buried carbon for fuel, cement,
asphalt, and plas cs. As is easy to see, these uses return carbon to the atmosphere very rapidly.
Carbon-bearing rock bodies can remain isolated from the atmosphere inside Earth for long
periods of me. Then, when tectonic processes expose these rock bodies at Earth’s surface,
weathering slowly returns the carbon they contain to the atmosphere. Volcanoes also return
carbon to the atmosphere, mostly in the form of carbon dioxide gas. When tectonic processes
cause solid rock inside Earth to par ally melt, gaseous compounds stored in the mantle and
crust dissolve into magma, move towards the surface, and eventually enter the atmosphere.
The release of gases from magma is like ‘popping the top’ on a soda bo le. Removing the cap
releases pressure and allows dissolved gases to ‘bubble out’. The expansion of these gases fuels
volcanic erup ons.
Thus, volcanoes move gaseous components like CO 2 from solid Earth to the atmosphere.
Although well known, modern volcanoes like Mt. St. Helens, Vesuvius, or those in Hawaii
represent only a small fraction of volcanism on Earth. Most volcanic erup ons (~90%) occur far
from human eyes, along mid-ocean ridges deep under the oceans. Relative to early Earth,
modern magma c ac vity is weak. Nevertheless, the release of modern magma c gases slowly
con nues the process that originally produced most of Earth’s oceans and atmosphere.
The tectonic engine that produces volcanoes also modulates most other carbon sources and
sinks. The eﬀect of these sources and sinks on the atmosphere and climate can be visualized
using a bathtub with faucets and drains, as illustrated in Figure 3.37. In such an atmospheric
‘bathtub’, carbon sources are ‘faucets’ that add to the atmosphere, and carbon sinks are ‘drains’
that remove atmospheric CO 2. Despite carbon dioxide’s supersized climate role, it is a minor
component of the atmosphere.

Figure 3.37. Cartoon showing how the relative strength and rates of Earth’s carbon sources and
sinks control the concentra on of atmospheric CO 2. (Author illustra on)

6

When sources add carbon faster than sinks can remove it, atmospheric CO 2 rises and Earth
warms. Likewise, when sinks remove carbon faster that sources add it, atmospheric CO 2 falls
and Earth cools. Thus, Earth warms when volcanoes and weathering of buried carbon add CO 2
faster than carbon burial can remove it, and Earth cools when the forma on of carbon-bearing
rocks removes carbon faster than carbon sources produce it. The history of Earth’s climate
consists of just these kinds of events.

Climate Pushes and Responses

As you now know, volcanoes and weathering carbon-bearing rocks push climate to warmer
conditions, and the forma on of carbon-bearing rocks pushes climate towards cooler
conditions. As pushes move climate in one direction or another, natural processes respond to
these pushes by resistingor enhancing the original push. In these ways, Earth’s climate system
consists of natural processes that complexly push and respond to global climate by changing the
concentra ons of atmospheric greenhouse gases.
In Earth’s climate system nega ve climate responses oppose pushes and counteract clima c
eﬀects by reducing or reversing them. Said diﬀerently, if pushes move a system in one direction,
nega ve responses move the system in the opposite direction. For example, if a push cools the
atmosphere, a nega ve response slows cooling or warms global climate.
In contrast, posi ve responses strengthen pushes. In other words, if a push moves a system in
one direction, posi ve responses move the system further in the same direction. For example, if
a push cools the atmosphere, a posi ve response further cools global climate. In Earth’s climate
system posi ve climate responses amplify clima c eﬀects. Glacial ice nicely illustrates such
posi ve climate responses. When pushes suﬃciently cool the atmosphere, glacial ice sheets can
form and expand. As ice sheets expand they reﬂect additional sunlight, which further cool
climate and generate even larger ice sheets. Such posi ve response cycles typically proceed for
a time but are eventually slowed by a nega ve response. For example, atmospheric cooling
progressive decreases water evapora on, which slows the buildup of ice.
Earth’s complex climate system consists of many such interconnected cycles. Some of the
natural processes that interact with or drive these cycles occur relatively quickly but most do
not. For example, asteroid impacts produce geologically-instantaneous pushes, whereas
tectonic pushes usually develop over millions of years. Like pushes, the rates of natural
responses vary widely. Rapid responses closely track changing climate conditions, but slow
responses lag far behind the eﬀects of climate pushes. Seasonal temperature varia ons provide
an accessible small-scale example of such delayed responses. Although the Sun heats the
northern hemisphere most around June 21st, the ho est period of northern summers occurs
much later, about the third week of July.
Another notable example involves modern burning of buried carbon. The human addition of

7
Another notable example involves modern burning of buried carbon. The human addition of
atmospheric CO 2 is geologically instantaneous, but climate system reactions are not. So,
problems that humanity can create in just a few decades take much longer for nature to solve.
For example, atmospheric temperature responds immediately to human additions of CO 2, but
removal of carbon by geologic burial takes place over hundreds of thousands to millions of
years.

How Habitability Persists

We now know enough to brieﬂy describe how Earth’s climate systems spontaneously maintains
planetary habitability. Despite numerous natural processes that push Earth towards runaway
climate states, nega ve climate responses and opposing pushes prevent Earth’s surface water
from completely solidifying or vaporizing. The arrows in Figure 3.38 illustrate these important
rela onships.

Figure 3.38. Diagram illustratinghow nega ve responses (upper return arrow) and opposing
pushes (lowest arrow) protect our planet from climate pushes (central arrows) that would
otherwise make Earth uninhabitable. (Author illustra on)
Earth’s carbon sources push global climate towards the runaway greenhouse state. However,
high temperatures at the hot end of habitability accelerate processes that remove atmospheric
CO 2 and cool Earth. These processes include the forma on of carbon bearing rocks, which
involves the weathering of igneous and metamorphic rocks. This nega ve climate response
prevents Earth from becoming uninhabitably hot.
At the cool end of habitability, things are diﬀerent because no similar nega ve climate response
prevents carbon sinks from making Earth uninhabitably cold. Instead, as carbon sinks push
Earth towards the runaway icehouse state, cooling climate slows carbon-sink processes. This
diminishes the cooling power of carbon sinks. In eﬀect, extremely cold climate conditions on
Earth ‘plug the CO 2 drains’ by dras cally slowing the forma on of carbon-bearing rocks (Figure
3.37).

8

Although this does not prevent Earth from entering extreme icehouse conditions (like Snowball
Earth episodes), it does set the stage for Earth’s recovery from all ice ages, extreme or not. With
the ‘CO 2 drains plugged’, the episodic release of volcanic CO 2 provides the opposing push that
eventually ends all ice ages and prevents Earth from staying uninhabitably cold.
In these ways, natural processes lawfully maintain our planetary paradise. Said diﬀerently, just
as opposing natural processes keep your body from expiring during life, so opposing natural
processes spontaneously maintain Earth’s habitability. As men oned, our Goldilocks home has
been habitable for single-celled organisms for at least 3.4 By but did not become habitable for
animals un l ~650 Mya. The events that comprise our planet’s long and fascinatingclimate
history form our planet’s very own ‘Goldilocks and the Three Climate States’ story—not too hot,
not too cold, but just right.
So, the next time Earth quakes, erupts, or storms, consider thanking her for being acitve.
Viewed from this perspecitve, so-called natural ‘disasters’ are habitability in action. They
represent humanity’s mortgage payment for our beau fully complex and complexly habitable
home—Earth. What’s more, this perspecitve can meaningfully inform our sense of stewardship
for our large round habita on. For example, humanity rou nely does things to Earth that
almost no one would consider doing to their own brick-and-mortar home, let alone to the
systems that keep that abode livable for present and future occupants. Before proceeding, we
invite you to take a few moments to consider the important implica ons of this powerfully
producitve perspecitve.

