3.7 Our Goldilocks Home 3. 7
Maintaining a Habitable Planet
Dr. Dan Moore and Dr. Brian Tonks, Geology and Physics Departments, BYU-Idaho

Civilization exists by geological consent, subject to change without no ce. —Will Durant

Learning Objective:
● Describe the development of Earth’s climate (in terms of states, transitons, and speciﬁc carbon
sources and sinks) from the mid-Paleozoic greenhouse, through the climate transiton that
produced the late Paleozoic icehouse, then through the transiton that produced the Mesozoic
greenhouse, and ﬁnally through the transiton that produced the modern Late Cenozoic icehouse.

Today, Earth’s climate lies near the cold end of the icehouse state, but rock bodies across the
planet record that Earth was in an extreme greenhouse state in the early Cenozoic. These
extremely diﬀerent climates become readily apparent when comparing present organisms to
those that inhabited western Wyoming during the 50-Mya extreme greenhouse. Today, the
area is a cold high desert inhabited by organisms like sagebrush, juniper, rabbits and antelope.
Earlier, this area was hot, humid, and hosted subtropical organisms, which were exquisitely
preserved in the sedimentary time capsule of an ancient lake. Figure 3.39 shows a few of these
fossilized organisms, which you can observed in the Visitor’s Center at Fossil Bu e National
Monument.

Figure 3.39. Photos of exquisitely preserved fossilized organisms that lived in the subtropical climate of
western Wyoming ~50 Mya. The upper-right photo shows the cool dry climate of today, and the fossils
demonstrate the earlier warm climate. (Author illustration, photos from NPS)

2
Palm trees and alligators live in Florida and Costa Rica today, not in Wyoming. In the last 50 My
the la tude and elevation of western Wyoming have changed little, but its climate has changed
a lot. What’s more, fossils clearly record that subtropical palm trees, alligators, and the like lived
year-round in Antarc ca during the ho est parts of the early Cenozoic extreme greenhouse.
Although astounding, it’s true. This early-Cenozoic extreme greenhouse climate event
illustrates what can happen when carbon sources dominate carbon sinks.
As illustrated in Figure 3.40, global climate tends towards the upper and lower limits of
planetary habitability. At these extremes opposing processes dynamically maintain fairly
constant climate, o en for rela vely long periods. Today, global climate lies at the cool end of
habitability, in the icehouse state. Figure 3.41 shows the climate states we will use to explore
how carbon-transfer events produced Earth’s recent climate history from the mid-Paleozoic to
today. Our exploration will provide you with the opportunity to deepen your intuiton about the
lawful nature of broad-scale transitons between greenhouse and icehouse climate states. Take
a moment to correlate the events represented by the two ﬁgures.

Figure 3.40. Broad-scale climate history of Earth. The ﬁgure also shows both the more-detailed
and averaged (light gray) cooling paths that produced today’s icehouse Earth. Note that
extreme climate states dominate Earth’s climate history. (Modiﬁed from Paleomap Project)

Figure 3.41. Major climate transitons from the mid Paleozoic to today. (Author illustration,
base maps by Ron Blakey)

From Greenhouse to Icehouse in the Late Paleozoic 

We begin our exploration of Earth’s recent climate history in the mid Paleozoic, with the
emergence of the ﬁrst land plants. Observations suggest that the ﬁrst land plants descended
from fresh-water algae. These plants were simple, like some modern mosses. As these plants

3
from fresh-water algae. These plants were simple, like some modern mosses. As these plants
established a ﬁrm foothold on land, animals followed. The movement of plants and animals
from ocean to land opened a new stage in the development of life. It also dras cally altered
Earth’s climate state.
Early plants were restricted to shorelines because their reproductive cells (spores) needed
water. As plants began crowding Earth’s shorelines, compe on for sunlight selected for taller
plants with broader crowns. Selective pressures also ins gated biological innovations such as
strong roots, eﬀective vascular ssues, and supportive wood. These biological innovations
produced Earth’s ﬁrst trees.
In the wetland environments where early fern-like trees thrived, dead trees o en fell into
standing water that contained little oxygen. Normally, the carbon in dead trees is oxidized and
returns to the atmosphere as CO 2. However, the swampwater common in early forests limited
oxygen’s access to much of the carbon in dead trees. As a result, thick deposits of carbon-rich
tree matter accumulated in wetland forests. A er these deposits were buried, they formed
abundant layers of coal and carbon-rich shale.
In this way, forested swamplands promoted the burial of vast quan es of carbon during the
late Paleozoic. How do you think this changed Earth’s climate. If you surmised that this event
caused global climate to cool and transitoned Earth into an icehouse climate state, you’re right
(see Figures 3.40-3.41). During this icehouse state, Earth experienced the fourth of its ﬁve large
ice ages. (The ﬁrst two ice ages were the Snowball Earth events we discussed earlier, the third
ended the early Paleozoic (Ordovician), and we inhabit the ﬁ h ice age; see Figure 3.40).

Figure 3.42. Paintingof a late Paleozoic coastal swampland, showing an amphibian and two
huge insects. (Author illustration)
Not only did carbon burial during the late Paleozoic greatly reduce atmospheric carbon dioxide,
it also caused atmospheric free oxygen to rise to the highest levels ever experienced on Earth
(see the oxygen spike in Figure 3.32). Soot preserved in sedimentary deposits from this me
indicate that these unusually high levels of free oxygen produced frequent and extensive ﬁres in
these swampy forests. What’s more, fossils from this time indicated that insects reached their
largest sizes. See, for example, the bird-sized dragonﬂy and alligator-sized millipede shown in
Figure 3.42. The amphibian shown in this ﬁgure is a descendant of Earth’s ﬁrst amphibians. As

4
Figure 3.42. The amphibian shown in this ﬁgure is a descendant of Earth’s ﬁrst amphibians. As
we’ll explore later, the abundant food and other selective pressures provided by early wetland
forests eventually molded shoreline-adapted ﬁshes into Earth’s ﬁrst amphibians
You might be interested to know that most of the coal that fueled humanity’s Industrial
Revolution was deposited in the wetland forests of the mid-to-late Paleozoic (Carboniferous). In
the centuries since the Industrial Revolution, humanity has con nued extractingenergy by
burning carbon-based fuels like coal, oil, and natural gas. This has resulted in the extremely
rapid return of this long-buried carbon to the atmosphere. More on modern climate warming
later.
More About Carbon Burial
Carbon burial, which produced the icehouse state of the late Paleozoic, is Earth’s chief carbon
sink. The removal of atmospheric carbon begins with weathering, the physical and chemical
destruction of surface rocks. Weathering acts as both a carbon source and carbon sink. For
example, the weathering of carbon-bearing rocks returns buried carbon to the atmosphere, and
the weathering of igneous and metamorphic rocks removes atmospheric CO 2. During periods
when global weathering rates are high, weathering typically removes much more carbon than it
adds because igneous and metamorphic rocks are far more abundant that carbon-bearing
sedimentary rocks.
The weathering of igneous and metamorphic rock produces physical sediments (like sand and
mud) and chemical sediments (like dissolved calcium and sodium). Both types of sediments
bury carbon. Global weathering rates are highest during periods with hot humid climates,
abundant mountain belts, and high biological produc vity.
Physical burial removes atmospheric carbon when dead organic matter accumulates (as in the
formation of coal) or when sediments bury organic material (as when sand or mud covers the
dead, carbon-rich bodies of aqua c microorganisms). Once buried, elevated temperatures
convert organic matter into coal, oil, and natural gas. This carbon typically remains buried for
extended periods, un l tectonic processes expose it to weathering. At the surface, the carbon in
rocks slowly reacts with oxygen and returns to the atmosphere as carbon dioxide.
The chemical burial of carbon begins in the atmosphere, where carbon dioxide dissolves into
rainwater. Incorporation of CO 2 makes rainwater slightly acidic, which accelerates weathering
and liberates elements elements calcium from rocks. In the ocean, these elements combine
with the dissolved carbon dioxide to form solid carbonate minerals like calcite. Although this
can happen inorganically, life mediates the formation of most carbonate minerals today. Once
buried, these minerals recrystallize to form solid carbonate rocks like limestone.
Recall that the burial of carbon controls the upper temperature limit of Earth’s habitable zone.
To illustrate this mechanism, consider that increasing atmospheric carbon dioxide raises global
temperature. Rising temperatures accelerate biological ac vity and weathering rates, the
essen al components of carbon burial. Thus, the removal of atmospheric carbon dioxide

5 essen al components of carbon burial. Thus, the removal of atmospheric carbon dioxide
increases as global temperatures rise. As you can see, this negative response to high surface
temperatures cools Earth. In this way, the cooling response produced by carbon sinks prevents
carbon sources from sending Earth into the runaway greenhouse state (Figure 3.38). Lawful
interactions like these are responsible for maintaining the habitability of Earth.
To close out our brief discussion of late Paleozoic climate cooling, we note the cooling caused
by the assembly of Pangaea, Earth’s most well-known supercon nent. As the con nents
collided, they formed large mountain belts like the Appalachians and Urals. The growth of these
mountain ranges signiﬁcantly increased global weathering, the production of physical and
chemical sediment, and carbon carbon burial. Interes ngly, Pangaea’s breakup also played an
important role in Earth’s next climate state—the Mesozoic greenhouse.

From Paleozoic Icehouse to Mesozoic Greenhouse 
Near the end of the Paleozoic, massive outpourings of magma in volcanic provinces in China
and then in Siberia sourced abundant atmospheric carbon. What’s more, the Siberian magma
erupted through and liberated CO 2 from near-surface coal deposits. This ‘triple whammy’
warmed global climate so rapidly that most populations of organisms went ex nct—they just
could not adapt quickly enough. During this event—Earth’s largest mass ex nction of animals,
~70% of terrestrial species and ~95% of marine species completely disappeared from Earth.
This climate warming also ended the late Paleozoic icehouse climate and ini ated the Mesozoic
greenhouse state. Later, magma c outpourings in the central Atlan c volcanic province ini ated
the breakup of Pangaea and sustained the Mesozoic greenhouse climate. During this me,
dinosaurs began dominatingterrestrial landscapes (Figure 3.43). Then, con nued ri ing of
Pangaea formed the Atlan c ocean. The birth of the Atlan c produced a nearly-modern
distribution of con nents and sourced the CO 2 that sustained a hot humid climate for most of
the next 200 My (Figure 3.40).

Figure 3.43. Paintingof predatory dinosaurs huntingfor prey in the hot humid forests of the
late Mesozoic. (Author illustration)

More About Volcanoes
As you know, volcanic ac vity like that responsible for Earth’s Mesozoic greenhouse climate
results from the slow ﬂow of solid rock into and in Earth’s mantle. What’s more, volcanic

6 results from the slow ﬂow of solid rock into and in Earth’s mantle. What’s more, volcanic
ac vity prevents Earth from persistingin an uninhabitably cold state. Even so, volcanic ac vity is
not a response to cooling (or warming) at Earth’s surface. Said diﬀerently, conditons at Earth’s
surface produce no short-term eﬀect on Earth’s tectonic engine. Thus, although volcanic ac vity
warms climate, volcanoes do not respond to cool surface conditons. In this way, volcanic
ac vity prevents Earth from remaining in the cold conditons that characterize the runaway
icehouse state but not from existingat those conditons for a time (Figure 3.38).
Most volcanic ac vity on Earth occurs at mid-ocean ridges. Thus, the rate of seaﬂoor spreading
strongly aﬀects global climate. Ocean ridge volcanism is most active during the breakup of
supercon nents and slows as supercon nents coalesce. On the ﬂipside, supercon nent
formation builds mountain belts and increases weathering rates. Thus, global climate typically
cools as supercon nents form and warms as they break up. This tectonic cycle, which builds
and splits supercon nents about every 500 My, has an important broad-scale eﬀect on global
climate.

From Greenhouse to Icehouse in the Mid-Cenozoic
Cenozoic mountain building ended the Mesozoic greenhouse. As the southern part of the
supercon nent Pangaea split, Africa and India began moving northward. Then, a er ~50 Mya
they began to collide with Eurasia. These tectonic movements, illustrated in Figure 3.44 formed
a large east-west belt of mountains that extends from Spain to China and includes the
Pyrenees, Alps, and Himalayas.

Figure 3.44. From upper right: Paleogeographic maps that show the progressive movement of
con nents from the latest Paleozoic to today. Note how Africa and India emerge from Pangaea,
migrate northward, and collide with Eurasia. (Author illustration, base maps by Ron Blakey)
As mountain ranges grew, intensiﬁed weathering and carbon burial cooled global climate.
Beginning ~35 Mya, this cooling once again transitoned Earth between climate states, in this
case from extreme greenhouse to cold icehouse. By 2.58 Mya, con nued cooling had ini ated
Earth’s modern Ice Age, which we’ll explore in more detail later.
A er the end-Mesozoic ex nction of ﬂightless dinosaurs, mammals radiated into vacated
environmental niches. Earth’s subsequent transiton to cooler drier climates caused organisms

7 environmental niches. Earth’s subsequent transiton to cooler drier climates caused organisms
to further adapt. Figure 3.45 shows some of the resultingorganisms. By ~5 Mya, con nued
cooling and drying caused forests to recede and Earth’s ﬁrst true grasslands to emerge.

Figure 3.45. Paintingof a mid-Cenozoic ecosystem in the cool dry interior of North America.
The grass-like plants are mostly sedges and bulrushes, not grasses. All the mammals shown are
now ex nct. (Author illustration)
More About Weathering
Weathering, like that responsible for Earth’s modern icehouse climate, is the physical and
chemical disintegration of rock at Earth’s surface. Weathering turns rock into sand, clay, and the
dissolved matter carried by rivers to oceans. In this way, weathering supplies beaches and dune
ﬁelds with sand, generates the mud that se les from s ll water, and makes the oceans ‘salty’.
Where active, tectonic upli con nually ‘feeds’ ever-deeper rock into the ‘buzzsaw’ of surface
weathering. In this way, rocks formed deep in the crust can be seen at Earth’s surface.
The rate of weathering is highest in mountains and during periods of abundant atmospheric
CO 2. In mountains, exposed rock, high precipitation, and freeze-thaw cycles accelerate
weathering. In contrast, abundant CO 2 and associated warming accelerate weathering by
increasing global rainfall, chemical reaction rates, and the acidity of water. These conditons
make rock easier to dissolve. Although weathering both returns CO 2 to and removes CO 2 from
the atmosphere, this important process typically buries far more carbon inside Earth than it
releases to the atmosphere.

Life Drives Climate and Climate Drives Life

As you have seen from our brief introduction to Earth’s climate history, biological changes can
tremendously aﬀect Earth’s atmosphere and climate. For example, the emergence of oxygen-
generatingphotosynthesizers in the middle Precambrian produced both the ﬁrst atmospheric
free oxygen and an extreme icehouse event. Also, the abundant burial of tree-carbon in the late
Paleozoic produced both an icehouse climate and the highest-ever concentrations of
atmospheric O 2.
On the ﬂip side, clima c and other atmospheric changes can dras cally alter the nature and

8 On the ﬂip side, clima c and other atmospheric changes can dras cally alter the nature and
development of Earth life. For example, the emergence of abundant free oxygen and transiton
from icehouse to greenhouse in the late Precambrian set the stage for the emergence of early
simple animals. In additon, the drying and cooling of climate that shrank wetland forests in the
late Paleozoic generated the selective pressures that produced early seed-bearing plants and
the ﬁrst rep les, which could both survive far from water.
Truly, climate change alters the trajectory of life, and biological change can alter Earth’s climate.
Said metaphorically, Earth’s ‘biospheric dragon’ con nually ‘brings along’ the very clima c tail
that it unceasingly ‘chases’.
