3.8 Modern Myopia 3. 8 
Contextualizing Present Climate
Dr. Dan Moore and Dr. Brian Tonks, Geology and Physics Departments, BYU-Idaho

We don’t inherit the Earth from our ancestors, we borrow it from our children. —Na ve
American proverb

Learning Objectives:
● Understand and be able to dis nguish between each of the following: icehouse climate state, ice
age, glacial period, and interglacial period. Iden fy the Earth processes that modulate the glacial
and interglacial periods of ice ages. Also, iden fy whether Earth is presently in a glacial or an
interglacial period of the modern ice age.
● Understand the context for Earth’s present climate. Also, be able to contextualize modern human-
induced climate change and describe how it will challenge human civilization.

By now you know be er, but many people (especially Western Chris ans) think that Earth has
‘pre y much always looked as it does today’. When they envision Earth’s past, they picture an
Earth with contemporary con nents, mountains, shorelines, and climate. Of course, those
seeking to understand Earth as it actually was, is, and will be recognize that this ‘sta c view’ of
Earth is a gross distor on of truth.
Even literalist readings of wri en scripture decry the falsity of this perspective. For example,
wri en scripture clearly indicates that early Earth experienced periods when there were no
con nents, oceans, plants, or animals. Despite this, some modern people uncri cally accept a
sta c Earth. Sadly, these individuals ﬁnd it easy to imagine that they live on a ‘throw away
Earth’ that emerged supernaturally a few years ago and will be modiﬁed supernaturally in the
near future. Such a worldview makes it diﬃcult to be the careful, conscien ous stewards of
Earth that wri en and natural scripture so clearly and powerfully urge.
If you know a good person with such a worldview, don’t despair. There’s actually a really good
reason why such an idea could sneak unbidden into human thinking. This myopic view is
founded in the following very thin slice of reality: Earth has experienced excep onally little
climate, coastline, or other change in the last 6-7 ky. To be sure, there have been natural
devastations aplenty. But large-scale change of the kind we’ve been discussing? Not a s tch!
This means that the en re wri en record—all of human history—postdates the most recent
signiﬁcant Earth changes. Said diﬀerently, human civilization grew up during a brief period
when Earth didn’t change much. Figures 3.46 and 3.47 illustrate this reality. Although false, can
you see how the no on that Earth has ‘pre y much always been like it is today’ emerged?

2

Figure 3.46. Le : Sea level from 24 kya to present. (Wikimedia) Right: Eastern US shoreline at
20 kya and from 7 kya to present. Note that sea level and shorelines changed dras cally from
20-7 kya, but have remained nearly constant since that me. (Adapted from USGS)

Figure 3.47. The temperature record from ~19 kya to present. Note that temperature has
changed little since 10 kya. (NOAA)
To illustrate the ‘thinness’ of this worldview, consider that the last ~10 ky represent just one-
millionth of one percent of Earth’s history. What’s more, the most recent few thousand years
could not be less representative of ‘normal’ Earth conditons. As you know, there is no one set
of a ributes that are ‘normal’ because changing conditons are the norm for Earth.

The Recent Development of Modern Climate 

Earth’s present climate lies in an interglacial period of the modern ice age (Figure 3.40). Recall
that icehouse states are periods when Earth is suﬃciently cool to produce substan al polar ice,
but ice ages are more severe. During ice ages, there are typically substan al ice caps at both
poles. Inside ice ages, cyclical clima c variations produced by variations in Earth’s orbit cause
glaciers to expand during glacial periods and retreat during interglacial periods, as illustrated in
Figure 3.48.

3

Figure 3.48. Maximum distribution of ice sheets during the modern interglacial period (Aug.
2011; NASA) and during a recent glacial period (base map by Ron Blakey).
To summarize, our modern verdant Earth lies in the Holocene Interglacial Period of the
Pleistocene Ice Age, itself a part of the Late Cenozoic Icehouse Climate. Figure 3.49 shows the
transitonal cooling that produced modern climate between ~50-35 Mya. As you know, this
cooling resulted from enhanced mountain building, weathering, and carbon burial (Figure
3.44). As Earth cooled through this transiton, the Antarc c ice sheet formed and expanded.

Figure 3.49. Cenozoic global temperatures and climate states. Note the broad-scale cooling and
the signiﬁcant small-scale variability. Also note the future modeled temperatures shown at
right. (NOAA)
By ~2.6 Mya, con nued cooling generated a northern ice cap (Figure 3.48). The growth of the
northern ice cap marked the beginning of the Pleistocene Ice Age. Since that me, ocean
sediments indicate there have been ~50 pairs of glacial-interglacial periods. As men oned,
these cyclical periods of cooling and warming result from variations in Earth’s orbit.
The most recent glacial period began ~115 kya, reached its maximum ~23 kya, and then
transitoned to the modern (Holocene) interglacial period ~11.7 kya. During the last glacial
period ice sheets extended south of the US-Canada border in North America; covered
Scandinavia, most of England, and northern Russia in Eurasia; and blanketed Antarc ca and
much of the Andes in the southern hemisphere (Figures 3.48). Figure 3.46 shows how sea level

4 much of the Andes in the southern hemisphere (Figures 3.48). Figure 3.46 shows how sea level
and shorelines changed as these glaciers retreated.
The transitons between and durations of glacial and interglacial periods are not symmetrical.
Instead, temperature falls slowly on the way into rela vely long-lived glacial periods, and then it
transitons rapidly into short-lived interglacial periods. This forms a sawtooth-shaped
temperature pa ern, as illustrated in the lower plots of Figure 3.50. Another important
a ribute of the modern ice age involves the duration of glacial-interglacial pairs. These
durations changed from ~41 to ~100 ky a er ~1 Mya. Signiﬁcantly, these durations match the
periods of cyclical variations in Earth’s axis and orbital shape, as illustrated in Figure 3.50.
Earth’s lt varies cyclically between 22.5° and 24.5° every ~41 ky because the Sun, Jupiter, and
other planets tug on Earth’s equatorial bulge. Today, Earth’s lt (23.5°) lies between these
extremes and is increasing (Figure 3.50). As you know, Earth’s lt determines the nature of its
seasons, but you may not know that higher lt produces longer, more extreme seasons. Thus,
during periods of high lt, polar winters are longer and Earth enters summers with more ice.
This ice reﬂects more summer sunlight and causes ever-milder summers and ever-cooler
winters. This positive response causes ice to advance year to year and can ini ate glacial
periods.
In additon, gravitational tugs from planets like Jupiter cyclically distort the shape of Earth’s
orbit, which completes a cycle about every 100 ky (Figure 3.50). During mes when Earth’s
orbit is mostly circular, Earth receives about the same amount of solar heatingthroughout the
year. In contrast, periods of more-ellip cal orbits cause uneven solar hea ng. During these
mes, Earth receives more solar heatingwhen near the Sun and less when far from the Sun.
These lt and orbital shape cycles combine to cause cyclical variations in the time of year (place
in Earth’s orbit) when seasons occur. The progressive movement of the seasons through Earth’s
orbit (called precession) aﬀects the amount of seasonal sunlight received by Earth. This
precession cycle lasts ~23 ky (Figure 3.50). In these ways, Earth’s seasons are most extreme
when lt orbital non-circularity are high and winters happen farthest from the Sun. Moreover,
extreme seasons favor the advance of glaciers and the ini ation of glacial periods.
These orbital cycles were discovered in the 1920s by Serbian geophysicist Milu n Milanković.
Collectively, these ‘Milankovitch’ cycles control the annual variations in solar heatingthat
modulate global climate. Even so, sunlight alone is insuﬃcient to explain the amount of cooling
and heatingassociated with transitons between glacial and interglacial periods. This should not
surprise us. It simply means that other aspects of Earth’s complex climate system also play
important roles. These include the carbon sources and sinks we’ve already discussed plus many
other aspects of the climate system—like lags in climate response and the inﬂuence of ocean
currents, biological produc vity, and long-term cloud cover. Expressed metaphorically,
Milankovitch cycles appear to ‘conduct’ Earth’s climate ‘symphony’, but other natural processes
produce most of the ‘music’.
This pa ern—ampliﬁcation of Milankovitch-cycle heatingby other natural processes—appears

5 This pa ern—ampliﬁcation of Milankovitch-cycle heatingby other natural processes—appears
to produce the transitons between glacial and interglacial periods. Later, we’ll explore how
these transiton and other climate change aﬀected the development of human bodies and
behaviors. For example, we’ll discover that the climate warming and stabilization that produced
the Holocene allowed humans in the Middle East to build the ﬁrst temples, domes cate the
ﬁrst plants and animals, and construct the ﬁrst ci es.

Figure 3.50. Upper Four Plots: Orbital cycles that modulate global temperature and glacial-
interglacial cycles by aﬀectingseasonal variations in solar hea ng. Lower Two Plots: Sawtooth-
shaped temperature variations of the most recent glacial-interglacial cycles as recorded in
ocean sediments and glacial ice cores. (Adapted from Wikimedia)

Climate In the Near Future 

Modern climate change is a conten ous topic in some sectors of present society, and separa ng
fact from ﬁction can be challenging for those who know little about Earth, climate systems, or
how science develops explanations in which humanity can exercise conﬁdence. Questions such
as the following burn bright in the minds of many: I hear so much about climate change, what is
true and what is hyperbole? Should humanity be concerned? What should society do about our
present situation? What should I do about it? Although the answers to some of these questions
lie far outside our scope, the aspects of climate we’ve addressed can contextualize answers to
these questions. We begin with simple, foundational truths that will allow us to explore
anthropogenic climate change.
Nearly everything you do and use requires energy, and most of that energy comes from burning
fossil fuels like petroleum and coal. Burning these fuels moves carbon from solid Earth to the
atmosphere much faster than natural systems can remove it. As a result, climate warms as
atmospheric CO 2 levels rise.

6

Figure 3.51. Global average temperature since 2 kya. (Wikimedia)
Humans began burning abundant fossil fuels at the start of the Industrial Revolution, in the late
1700s. Natural records demonstrate that the concentration of atmospheric CO 2 from 10 kya to
the Industrial Revolution was ~250 molecules per million (ppm). Today, CO 2 concentrations are
well over 400 molecules per million, and they are rising. Figure 3.51 shows global temperatures
since the birth of Christ, and Figure 3.52 shows that natural processes cannot themselves
account for the observed warming of ~2 °F (>1 °C) . These and other observations strongly
suggest that human burning of fossil fuels has increased atmospheric CO 2 and warmed global
temperatures.

Figure 3.52. Global observed surface temperatures since 1880 (top), and modeled climate
contributions of natural and human processes (bo om). (USGCRP, Wikimedia)
Having explored basic, well-established principles and observations, we’re ready to explore
issues about which there is much disagreement and confusion among nonspecialists. For
example, as global temperatures rise, will Earth and Life be okay? Yes, Earth will be ﬁne, but the
answer for life is more complicated. Although life can thrive in warmer temperatures, the ability

7 answer for life is more complicated. Although life can thrive in warmer temperatures, the ability
of organisms to adapt is strongly dependent on the rate of climate change. It’s o en how
quickly climate changes, not the change itself, that causes ex nction. Present rates of climate
change are similar to those Earth experienced near the end of the Paleozoic when rapid carbon
release from volcanoes and coal produced Earth’s largest animal ex nction. In short, signiﬁcant
fractions of current biodiversity are in danger of going ex nct. It’s diﬃcult to overstate this
conclusion.
Well, how about humanity: Will we be okay? As for life, the answer dependstion what you mean
by ‘okay’. Without question, humanity has the ability to greatly reduce our impact and to adapt
—but both require desire, planning, eﬀort, sacriﬁce, and money…lots of money. Whether we
choose to proactively reduce emissions or are forced to respond to the eﬀects of rising
temperatures, it’s going to be really expensive.
To get a sense of how present and future climate change will aﬀect humanity, let’s look to the
past—to well-documented events in human history. Few historians disagree that climate
change played signiﬁcant—even dominant—roles in the destabilization and eventual demise of
many ancient peoples, including these:
● The Akkadian Empire in the Middle East and the Old Kingdom in Egypt collapsed when
climate dried ~4.2 kya.
● The Maya civilization in Mesoamerica collapsed when climate dried in the 800s AD.
● The Vikings le Greenland, peoples of the American Southwest le their ci es, and the
Khmer civilization in southeast Asia collapsed during a period of cooling and drying known
as ‘the little Ice Age’ (from 1300-1800s; Figure 3.51).
Harvard Archaeologist Dr. Jason Ur has said “When we excavate the remains of past
civilizations, we very rarely ﬁnd any evidence that they as a whole society made any a empts to
change in the face of a drying climate, a warming atmosphere or other changes [….] I view this
inﬂexibility as the real reason for collapse” (Source NASA). Additonal examples of groups
aﬀected by climate change abound, including changes that destabilized socie es without
causing their demise.
Before proceeding, take a moment to correlate the ming of the events listed above with the
temperature record in Figure 3.47. No ce that the examples provided above are all associated
with very small climate change events. Also note that even modest projections of future
temperature (Figure 3.49) represent rela vely large changes, and extreme projections involve
rapid transiton to a greenhouse climate. Taking into account sound principles, observed reality,
historical eﬀects and the like, it’s diﬃcult to make a valid case that human-induced climate
change won’t signiﬁcantly aﬀect present human civilizations.
The reality is that any signiﬁcant degree of climate change is bad for human civilization, no
matter its cause. Thus far, humanity has treated Earth as if it never changes and will always
freely provide the same amount of what we need. The moment we must pay for things we take
for granted—like steady sea level or climate—life becomes very expensive, very rapidly. That

8 for granted—like steady sea level or climate—life becomes very expensive, very rapidly. That
expense will nega vely impact standard of living, and people get really grumpy, really quickly
when their standard of living drops.
Climate change is expensive because it requires socie es to adjust. For example, warming
climate raises sea level and alters regional climates. So humanity will need to make
stupendously expensive changes like moving coastal ci es. Unfortunately, most (all?)
governments are unprepared to ﬁnance or carry out these kinds of ac vi es, and history is
replete with examples of socie es being destabilized by much smaller issues. Sadly, such
destabilization typically produces human conﬂict and abundant death.
So, what should humanity do about all this? First, recall that deciding what humanity does
requires individuals and socie es to make value judgments based on the best available scien ﬁc
data. Said diﬀerently, any wise course of action must be consistent with scien ﬁc ﬁndings, but
those ﬁndings alone cannot uniquely iden fy a course of action. Prudent paths forward likely
involve signiﬁcantly reducing fossil fuel emissions and preparing for climate warming while
trying to minimize impactstion standard of living.
Reducing fossil fuel emissions requires increasing our reliance on other sources of energy. At
present, nuclear power is the only source of energy that can replace carbon-based sources
without decreasing standard of living. Of course, nuclear energy can (and should) be
supplemented by renewable sources like solar, wind, and wave energy, but these sources alone
are insuﬃcient to replace carbon-based sources.
The degree to which humanity decides to approach climate change with wisdom will depend at
least in part on you because global solutions to climate change will consist of international,
national, regional, community, and individual solutions. As you make choices and vote on topics
related to climate, recognize that these issues have become extremely poli cized and that there
are many that would seek to deceive you. We strongly encourage you to develop an informed
perspective using reputable sources of climate science and to be a wise steward of our
habitable home. How you and your generation choose to handle human-induced climate
change will impact the future.

A Final Word

As we complete our exploration of the formation, functioning, and history of Earth, we invite
you to take a moment to assess what you have learned about our Goldilocks planet. Do you
now see layers of rock as pages of natural scripture that tell the story of the Ongoing Creation
of Earth to anyone with ‘ears to hear’? Have you come to know the Creator be er? Do you
think about Earth’s habitability in the same way? Has apparent conﬂict between scien ﬁc and
religious accounts of Creation diminished? Have your ideas about and commitment to human
stewardship changed or been strengthened?
We witness that natural processes and lawful interactions produced Earth and made it
habitable. In other words, we assert that Earth formed and developed into our self-maintaining

9
habitable. In other words, we assert that Earth formed and developed into our self-maintaining
habitable home through lawful self-assembly. What’s more, we aﬃrm that a self-assembled
Earth is fully consistent with the asser on that God formed Earth.
We hope you’ve enjoyed this important Earthly por on of our journey From Atoms to Humans.
Having looked at the lawful origins of order in Earth, we now turn our focus to order in Life and
the order in us.
