4.1 Diﬀerently the Same!
The Unity and Diversity of Life
Dr. Dan Moore and Dr. Alan Holyoak, Geology and Biology Departments, BYU-Idaho

Evolution isn't just a story about where we came from. It's an epic at the center of life itself. Far
from robbing our lives of meaning, it instills an appreciation for the beau ful, enduring, and
ul mately triumphant fabric of life that covers our planet. Understanding that doesn't demean
human life—it enhances it. —Kenneth R. Miller

Learning Objectives:
● Understand and be able to iden fy each of the following: the fossil record, the unity and diversity of
life, prokaryotes, eukaryotes, descendancy, adaptation, homologous traits, analogous traits, and
various homologies—anatomical, biochemical, embryological, vestigial, and fossil. Also, iden fy
characteris cs that distinguish living organisms from nonliving things.
● Iden fy the a ributes used to classify humans as animals, vertebrates, mammals, primates,
hominins, and Homo sapiens.
● Iden fy examples of how humans are similar to and diﬀerent from other organisms. Also, describe
what causes this unity and diversity.

Have you ever wondered what it means to be alive? Though diﬃcult to believe, it’s challenging
to create a deﬁnition of life that works in all situations. Clearly, horses are living organisms, but
are viruses or prions? The characteris cs in Table 4.1 distinguish living organisms from most
nonliving things.
Table 4.1. Distinguishing characteris cs of living organisms.

2
In addition to these a ributes, living things can fossilize. Some fossil organisms have surviving
descendants. Other fossils record organisms that are now ex nct. The fossil record includes all
fossilized organisms and the information derived from them.
Among the most astounding a ributes of life is its spectacular diversity and its undeniable
unity. Tremendous diﬀerences distinguish living things, and yet stupendous
similarities unify them. When observing organisms like banana trees and buﬀalo, we see mostly
diﬀerences. Surprisingly, the a ributes that distinguish organisms emerge from astounding
underlying similari es. Faced with this apparent paradox, many have wondered how such
tremendous external diversity developed from such astounding internal uniformity. In other
words, how did living things become so ‘diﬀerently the same’?

The Diversity and Unity of Life T h e D i v e r s i t y a n d U n i t y o f L i f e

Species are distinguished by their unique characteris cs, by their diversity. At present,
humanity has iden ﬁed ~1.8 million species of living things, andties mates suggest there may
be as many as 13 million additional species (Table 4.2). Of course, the number of species on
Earth changes through me, because new species emerge (evolve) and existing species go
ex nct.
Table 4.2. Observed and predicted diversity of living organisms.

In recent centuries, humanity has learned to read the natural scripture found in the genes and
other characteris cs of living and fossil organisms. This natural scripture records the original
development and ongoing creation of life. For example, fossil and genetic scripture indicate that
simple single-celled organisms lacking nuclei (prokaryotes like bacteria) emerged on Earth no
later than 3.4 Bya, that single-celled organisms containing nuclei and other specialized cellular
compartments (eukaryotes like amoeba) developed by 2.1 Bya, and mul cellular eukaryotes
(like animals and plants) appeared much later, by 0.65 Bya. This natural scripture also records
the shared origins and relatedness of all ancient and living organisms. The descendancy
(parent-child) relationships that deﬁne these shared origins produced the unity of life.
As Earth and life changes, successive generations of organisms must adapt or go ex nct.
Adaptation occurs across generations when the relative abundance of a ributes in an
interbreeding population change. For example, a drying climate can cause beak a ributes in a
bird population to change across generations. Where isolated populations of the same species
encounter diﬀerent conditions, they typically adapt in diﬀerent ways. Across many generations,

3 encounter diﬀerent conditions, they typically adapt in diﬀerent ways. Across many generations,
such diverging adaptation trajectories can produce two or more species from what was
originally a single species. Adaptation to changing environmental conditions produced the
diversity of life we see today.
In these ways, the diversity of life records the ways that species have adapted to succeed in
Earth’s diverse environments, and the unity of life records the relatedness of all living things.
Said diﬀerently, descendancy produced the unity of life and adaptation generated the diversity
of life. Can you see how the unity and diversity of life both result from successive populations of
organisms responding to changing environments? These deeply meaningful ideas are
beau fully illustrated in Figure 4.1.

Figure 4.1. Illustration of the historical descendancy and diversiﬁcation of Earth life.

Humans Display both Unifying and Distinguishing Traits H u m a n s D i s p l a y b o t h U n i f y i n g a n d D i s n g u i s h i n g T r a i t s

Like all other organisms, humans have traits that make them unique. For example, Table 4.3
lists diﬀerences between humans and our closest genetic relatives, chimpanzees.
Table 4.3. Traits indicating diﬀerences between humans and chimpanzees.

4

Each aspect of human bodies records information about its function and origin. A few aspects
of humans are illustrated in Figure 4.2.

Figure 4.2. Illustrations showing aspects of human bodies like musculature and skeletal
structure. (Author illustration, images from Shu erstock)
Although unique, humans share numerous a ributes with other organisms (Table 4.4). These
shared a ributes indicate that humans are related to all other living things. Thus, like all
organisms, human a ributes illustrate both life’s diversity and unity. As we’ll explore, these
similarities and diﬀerences result from lawful biological processes. With us, are you cap vated
and humbled by the diversity and relatedness of all living things?
Table 4.4. Examples of traits that show the relatedness of humans and other organisms.

Modern biology classiﬁes organisms using their similarities and diﬀerences. Table 4.5 shows the
biological classiﬁcation of humans. These a ributes also allow humanity to establish the
relatedness of species, as illustrated in Figure 4.1.

5
Table 4.5. The biological classiﬁcation of humans.

Most people know that humans are mammals, but many aren’t familiar that we are primates
and hominins (Table 4.5). Today, humans are the only hominins on Earth, but our ancestors
shared the planet with other hominin species—’cousins’ that also used tools and ﬁre, wore
clothing, built temporary structures, and lived in family groups. Later, we’ll discover that our
species interbred with several of these hominin species.
Most people readily accept the relatedness of living things like bacteria, plants, ﬁshes, and
mammals, but some people are strongly opposed to the relatedness of humans to other
organisms. Although these individuals believe that God created all living things, they believe
that humans are not related to God’s other living creations—organisms like chimpanzees,
elephants, dinosaurs, and ﬁshes.
Certainly, wri en scripture records that human bodies were part of the Ongoing Creation of
Earth and Life (Genesis 1), but scripture does not record the process by which human bodies
were created—other than to say that humans were created from earth, by God (Genesis 3).
Although some religious leaders have shared personal interpretations and perspectives to the
contrary, wri en scripture presents no doctrine regarding the origin of human bodies that
requires conﬂict with what humanity has discovered by studying gene c, anatomical, and fossil
scripture. This should not surprise us, for God is the source of both wri en and natural
scripture. We witness that both records provide complementary truths about human origins.
More on this later.

What Do Human A ributes Record about Origins?

So, are humans really related to other organisms, as shown in Figure 4.1 and Table 4.4? In
other words, can human a ributes falsify the notion that we share common origins with the
rest of life? Said another way, do human a ributes record shared ancestry or some other mode

6
rest of life? Said another way, do human a ributes record shared ancestry or some other mode
of creation? These are important ques ons that warrant commi ed exploration.
Recall that scien ﬁc explanations make testable predictions—descriptions of the natural world
that must be true if the explanation is true. In this way, origin by adaptation and descendancy
(evolution) makes speciﬁc predictions about traits that should be observed in humans if the
explanation is true. For example, if humans developed by descent with modiﬁcations from pre-
existing organisms, then the following should be observed:
● Aspects of the human body and the body as a whole should be ﬁnely tuned to speciﬁc
functions.
● The human body should be replete with a ributes shared with other organisms.
● Humans should have a fossil record that consists of fossil organisms that show
progressively-more-human characteris cs through time.
Form Fits Function
Recall that adaptation across mul ple generations promotes characteris cs that enhance
survivability and eliminates characteris cs that inhibit reproductive success. Thus, adaptation
molds bodies to their environment—making the scriptural analogy of forming bodies by
‘molding clay’ both beau ful and accurate. As we’ll see, ‘lawful body molding’ accurately
describes how bodies and species self-assemble.
Human anatomy is ﬁnely tuned for core activities at all scales. For example, our anatomy is
precisely adapted for walking and running; understanding, planning, and imagining; skillfully
manipulating tools; communicating verbally and nonverbally; pumping air and blood; and using
molecules like proteins for speciﬁc functions—as illustrated in Figure 4.3.

Figure 4.3. Images showing a few of the pervasively-ﬁne-tuned nature of human a ributes.
(Author illustration, images from Shu erstock and Wikimedia)

7
Shared A ributes
Similarities between organisms come in at least two important forms. Analogous traits are
similarities in function that result from adaptation, not descendancy. Bird wings and ﬂy wings
are excellent examples of analogous traits. Both make ﬂight possible, but they accomplish this
feat with very diﬀerent anatomy.
In contrast, homologous traits are similarities that result from descendancy. Although diverging
adaptation can alter the size, shape, or function of a homologous feature, the similarity
resulting from descendancy remains. For example, although the genetic code that builds each
organism is dis nct, all organisms use the same genetic ‘language’. This deep similarity makes
DNA a powerful example of a homologous trait. Homologous traits can be found in all aspects
of organisms—in their anatomy, embryonic development, and biochemistry. Homologous
features that have lost their original function are called vestigial traits.
The anatomical similarities shown in Figure 4.4 are excellent example of an anatomical
homology. No ce the pattern, starting at the shoulder: one bone, two bones, lots of smaller
bones, and relatively long bones. Despite diﬀerences in relative size, shape, and function, every
animal with bony limbs follows this pattern. Like limbs, every part of human anatomy—brain,
lungs, jaw, teeth, hair, skin, and sotion—is homologous to elements in other organisms.

Figure 4.4. Color-coded illustration of homologous bones in mammal forelimbs. (Wikimedia)
Like our anatomy, human embryological development is homologous to that of other
organisms. For example, organisms are nearly indistinguishable at the single-cell and simple-
clump-of-cells stages. In addition, even embryos are astoundingly homologous, as illustrated in
Figure 4.5. If the labels weren’t there, could you iden fy the animal each embryo will become?
Although less accessible to many, biochemical (molecular) traits provide some of the most
profound examples of homologous a ributes. For example, all organisms use homologous
cellular machinery to build and con nuously rebuild their bodies. Figure 4.6 illustrates several

8 cellular machinery to build and con nuously rebuild their bodies. Figure 4.6 illustrates several
of these biochemical homologies.

Figure 4.5. Illustration of embryos showing homologous development. Did you know that
dolphins grow hind limbs (h) during embryonic development? (Author illustration, images from
Wikimedia)

Figure 4.6. Illustrations of biochemical homologies. The top row illustrates that all living things
use DNA and organize amino acids to produce proteins in homologous ways. The bo om row
illustrates the homologous nature of all animal cells and of the genes/proteins that ini ate the
formation of animal body segments. (Author illustration, images from Shu erstock and
Wikimedia)

9

vestigial structures provide astounding observational evidence of the relatedness of humans
and other organisms. Some individuals struggle to reconcile the numerous broken and unused
aspects of human bodies with their perspective of creation. We witness that this apparent
inconsistency results from assuming that God creates like humans—for if God creates lawfully
vestigial elements are not astounding, they’re expected.

Figure 4.7. Examples of (vestigial) body parts that are broken in or poorly used by humans.
(Author illustration, Wikimedia and Shu erstock)
Figure 4.7 shows four examples of body parts that are vestigial in humans but have functions in
other organisms. Animals with a functioning appendix can extract energy and matter from the
cell walls of plants in ways that humans cannot. For this reason, eating leaves (’salad’) makes
cows fat but humans skinny. Similarly, animals like rabbits enhance their hearing by moving
their ears as if they were reorienting satellite dishes. They do this using ear muscles that
humans have but can’t much use. Although you may be able to wiggle your ears a li le, that
feature is vestigial in your body. What’s more, many animals use a ‘Jacobson organ’ to ﬁnd prey,
sense predators, or locate a mate, but this li le beauty is mostly vestigial in humans. Likewise,
the yolk sac in human embryos is vestigial (since human embryos receive nutrients from their
mothers through the umbilical cord).

Figure 4.8. Photos of functioning third eyelids in a cat (par ally closed, le ) and bird (closing
and closed, center), and the vestigial third eyelid in humans (Plica semilunaris, right). (Author
illustration, images from Wikimedia)
The images in Figure 4.8 all relate to a third eyelid (nic tating membrane) that many other
animals can use to protect their eyes. These eyelids close from inside-out rather than from top
or bo om. Sadly, this feature is vestigial in humans. Wouldn’t it be cool if we didn’t have to

10 or bo om. Sadly, this feature is vestigial in humans. Wouldn’t it be cool if we didn’t have to
wear goggles to see clearly underwater or while riding a motorcycle?
Like second eyelids, tails are vestigial in humans (Figure 4.9). Did you know that human genes
build protruding tails in embryo? Nearly always, this por on of human tails resorbs before birth.
However, a small percentage of infants are born with protruding tails. When this happens,
doctors remove the vestigial appendage. Even so, normal humans have internal tail bones that
are vestigial.

Figure 4.9. Photos of vestigial tails in humans—a normal protruding tail in embryo (le ), an
abnormal protruding tail atter birth (center), and normal internal tail bones in adults (coccyx, in
red; right). (Author illustration, images from Wikimedia)
As with human tails, human hair shows vestigial traits like those illustrated in Figure 4.10. Did
you know, for example, that hair covers humans nearly as completely as most mammals? This
hair is thickest in humans near birth. atter birth, most body hair becomes very ﬁne. What’s
more, modern humans have ativestigial muscle that causes hair to stand on end. Erecting hair
allows our thickly hair-covered relatives to stay warm and to appear larger when threatened.
These situations Fstill cause the hair muscle to activate in modern humans, but the response no
longer keeps us warm or makes us look larger. It just gives us vestigial ‘goose bumps’. Another
witness of recent hairy ancestors is the strong vestigial grip of human infants. In our relatives,
this response keeps infants safe, but in humans it no longer ﬁlls a purpose.

Figure 4.10. Photos of vestigial a ributes related to human hair. Le : Near birth, humans
display a thick hair covering (lenugo,). Middle: vestigial hair muscles (Arrector pili). Right:
vestigial grasping response in human infants and its prac cal use in chimp infants. (Author
illustration, images from Wikimedia)
As you likely know, upright posture is a relatively recent adaptation in the human lineage.
Unsurprisingly, our bodies contain abundant vestigial a ributes related to our bipedal posture.
Figure 4.11 illustrates a few of these ‘le overs’ (vestigial a ributes). For example, human feet
retain the muscles and tendons that would allow us to grasp with our feet, but the walking-

11
retain the muscles and tendons that would allow us to grasp with our feet, but the walking-
adapted bones in our feet no longer allow this range of motion. In addition, the growth pattern
on male chest hair is ativestigial version of the pattern that guides the ﬂow of rainwater in four-
legged mammals. Similarly, human nasal cavities have yet to fully transition to two-legged
posture. As a result, humans are prone to nasal issues related to poor drainage.

Figure 4.11. Photos of vestigial a ributes related to human posture. Le : Relatively useless
grasping muscles and tendons in a human foot. Center: Four-legged ‘drip’ pattern in the chest
hair of a human male. Right: A nasal cavity well-suited for face-down draining. (Author
illustration, images from Wikimedia and Shu erstock)
In addition to the types of vestigial homologies introduced above, humans have many vestigial
genes. Figure 4.12 illustrates an interesting example related to the three genes that produce
vitamin-C in most ﬁsh, amphibians, rep les, birds, and mammals. Vitamin-C production
requires the coordinated eﬀorts of all three genes. Sadly, all primates share a single-le er error
in the ﬁnal gene that causes it to malfunction. As a result, humans and other primates have to
ingest vitamin-C, whereas the bodies of most other animals produce it themselves. Super
interesting, right?!

Figure 4.12. Le : Image showing the single-gene c-le er dele on that broke the vitamin-C-
producing process in primates. Such broken genes are called pseudogenes. Right: A family tree
iden fying when the vitamin-C-related genetic error occurred. (Author illustration)
vestigial body parts witness to this important biological reality: Use it or lose it! Even seemingly
essen al aspects of bodies are lost if they do not help individuals survive to reproduce. For
example, many organisms that have lived far from light for many generations lose their
pigmentation and ability to see—as illustrated in Figure 4.13.

12

Figure 4.13. Photos of blind, unpigmented cave ﬁsh, shrimp, and a salamander. (Author
illustration, images from Wikimedia)
The loss of pigmentation in cave animals has an analog in humans. Dark skin protects from the
Sun, and light skin enhances vitamin-D production in low-light conditions. Human bodies record
that the poorly-pigmented light skin of northern Europeans developed from well-pigmented,
dark-skinned humans that spread from Africa. In addition, ar facts and genetic evidence
suggest that these early northern humans covered their bodies in clothing to stay warm. Thus,
poor pigmentation in light-skinned human populations is both adaptive and vestigial.
The human vestigial traits discussed above barely ‘scratch the surface’. Humans display
numerous additional ves ges from the past. Additional examples include wisdom teeth, male
nipples, hiccups, embryological homologies galore, and thousands of vestigial genes.
The Human Fossil Record
As men oned, if descendancy and adaptation produced modern organisms, then fossils should
mark clear paths from early to modern organisms. Figure 4.14 shows the generic patterns
displayed by fossil observations and interpretations. The interpretation shown makes testable
predictions, and to date humanity has been unable to iden fy fossil organisms that falsify this
interpretation. Figure 4.15 shows that, like other modern organisms, the human fossil record
follows the patterns illustrated in Figure 4.14.

Figure 4.14. Images illustrating the relationship between a ribute and age observations of
fossils (dots, le ) and interpreted descendancy-and-adaptation patterns (con nuous branching
pattern, right). If each type of fossil organism were shown, the plot would contain nearly
innumerable dots. (Author illustration, images adapted from Wikimedia)

13

Figure 4.15. Le : Illustration showing the observed human fossil record over the last ~7 Mya.
All these hominins are presently ex nct, except for us (Homo sapiens). Right: Illustration of the
interpreted descendancy relationships that produced humans and other primates over the last
~160 My. In both images, distinguishing traits are distributed le -to-right and age diminishes
upward. (Author illustrations)
Truly, the unity and diversity of life is tremendous. Despite signiﬁcant diﬀerences between
species, all living things are profoundly similar—because we’re all biologically related. These
beau ful truths provide powerful perspective regarding humanity’s place on Earth, our
relationships to sister species, and our responsibilities to safeguard our shared home, Earth.
Notably, living organisms are ‘diﬀerently the same’ because earlier populations produced later
generations, and each progressive generation adapted to speciﬁc environments and changes.
Said diﬀerently, past descendancy produced the present unity of life and earlier innovative
adaptation generated the current diversity of life. This descent with adaptation across
generations is called biological evolution. More on the ‘e’ word later.
Interestingly, most people readily accept the role of evolution in organisms like viruses,
bacteria, plants, insects, ﬁshes and mammals, but many of these same people do not accept
that descent with adaptation (evolution) produced the human body. In our experience, these
individuals rarely care how humans were created. Instead, they oppose evolution in an a empt
to aﬃrm who created humans. Moreover, many of these individuals believe that they can only

14 to aﬃrm who created humans. Moreover, many of these individuals believe that they can only
either accept the reality of evolutionary processes or the reality of a Godly Creator—but never
both. For many, this false dichotomy lies at the heart of confusion about evolution.
As we close this topic, recall that ﬁnding truth requires wanting to know with suﬃcient sincerity
that you’re willing to replace old comfortable notions with newly-discovered ideas that contain
more truth (Moroni 10). No matter your current perspective regarding evolution, we invite you
to search sincerely and with real intent. If you do, you’re in for a treat because evolution is a
fascinatingly powerful explanation. Happy exploring!

