4.10 Who’s Your Daddy?
Molding Hominins into Homo Sapiens
Dr. Dan Moore and Dr. Brian Tonks, Geology and Physics Departments, BYU-Idaho

The human brain has 100 billion neurons, each neuron connected to 10 thousand other neurons.
Si ng on your shoulders is the most complicated object in the known universe. —Michio Kaku
Learning Objectives:
● Understand the basic nature of these organisms and be able to iden fy the opportuni es, obstacles,
and adaptations that characterize the transi ons between them: australopiths, Homo erectus, and
archaic (anatomically modern) Homo sapiens. Also, understand the basic characteris cs of
Neanderthals and Denisovans.
The diversity and longevity of australopith species witnesses to their success as foragers on the
African plains. Even so, australopiths were unable to regularly harvest a par cularly rich source
of plains calories, the meat of herd animals. In this sense, australopiths represent an essen al
ini al step in the transi on from arboreal to plains apes. Figure 4.57 shows the temporal range
of important precursor and true hominin species, together with other signiﬁcant aspects of
human evolution.
The molding of australopiths generated our genus, which includes early members like Homo
habilis and Homo erectus. Homo bodies were molded to consistently and eﬃciently access the
calories in large plains mammals like antelope and elephants. This fascina ng evolutionary
episode comprises the last large-scale steps in forming anatomically-modern human bodies.
These transi ons are remarkable because they molded Earth’s top predator (you) from an
australopith body that lacked the physical a ributes of tradi onal predators.

Molding Australopiths into Homo erectus
Australopiths were the ﬁrst apes to walk upright eﬃciently, live foraging lifestyles in grasslands,
and make and use simple tools. Despite these successes, australopiths were poor runners,
could not precisely manipulate small tools, and competed only poorly with predators for access
to meat.
Homo erectus was a long-lived hominin species that had fully human skeletons from the neck
down; could run eﬃciently for long distances during the middle of the day; made and used
improved tools; could throw with force and accuracy; and had rela vely large brains and
increased cogni on and socialization. This species emerged by ~2 Mya, had largely been
replaced by other Homo species (including our own) by ~300 kya, and was ex nct by ~50 kya.
Homo erectus individuals stood ~4.6-6.0 feet tall (1.4–1.8 m) and weighed 90–130 pounds (40–

2 Homo erectus individuals stood ~4.6-6.0 feet tall (1.4–1.8 m) and weighed 90–130 pounds (40–
60 kg). If you observed a H. erectus individual walking down the street, you wouldn’t no ce
anything strange about their bodies—except for their heads, which were about a third smaller
than modern humans and had prominent brow ridges and no chins. H. erectus lived hunter-
gatherer lifestyles and were the ﬁrst known hominin to leave Africa. Figure 4.58 illustrates
important H. erectus a ributes.
H. erectus a ributes and behaviors emerged over time and were remarkably ‘human’. They
were able hunters, made and used spears and stone tools that required great dexterity and skill,
lived in small family groups, built temporary huts, used clothing and ﬁre, and established camps
with areas that focused on speciﬁc tasks like processing game, making tools, cooking, and
disposing of garbage. Their lifestyles indicates that they had the ability to plan, communicate,
and coordinate activi es, but it is unclear whether they used spoken language. What’s more,
ar facts suggest they may have been capable of simple symbolic thought.

Figure 4.57. Illustrations slowing the temporal ranges of many hominin species (le ), the
evolutionary path that produced human bodies (lower-right), and milestones in human
evolution (upper-right). (Author illustrations)

3

Figure 4.58. Images showing important a ributes of Homo erectus. (Author illustration; map
from sciencemag.org, skeleton from Smithsonian Ins tution, tribe image by Chris an Jegou,
and other images from Wikimedia)
As men oned, the same grasslands in which australopiths gathered insect and plant food
contained abundant herds of large mammals. The meat of these herd animals represented a
huge opportunity, an untapped source of calorie-rich food. Unfortunately, australopith bodies
were the result of nearly 60 My of selection for living in trees and collec ng and ea ng fruit,
insects, and leaves—followed by a shorter period of selection for living a foraging lifestyle on
the African plains. These periods of selection for arboreal and then plains-forager lifestyles
produced australopiths bodies that were slow, weak, and lacked claws, sharp teeth, and natural
body armor. These physical a ributes represented signiﬁcant obstacles that prevented
australopiths from reliably accessing the calorie-rich meat of large plains mammals.
Despite these formidable barriers, at least one lineage of australopiths developed the ability to
reliably kill large plains animals. They did so using a highly unconven onal set of predatory
a ributes. These adaptations included lower bodies (bu s, hips, legs, and feet) molded to
eﬃciently run long distances; hands molded for the ﬁne-motor control and strong grip
necessary to make and use precision tools; shoulders molded for powerful, accurate throwing;
brains (and their containers, skulls) molded for planning, communica ng, and working
eﬀectively in groups; and a ributes that allowed vigorous physical activity during the ho est
part of the day activity. Notably, these adaptations did not include typical predatory a ributes
such as sharp body parts, strength, or speed.
The adaptations that enabled H. erectus to be active during the middle of the day when most
animals are inactive included upright posture, bipedal locomo on, a slim build that minimized
exposure to the Sun, ﬁne hair, and incredibly-abundant sweat glands that release heat.
Although hair ﬁned across most of the body, thick hair remained were it was useful—atop the
head where it protected from sunlight, above the eyes where it shielded eyes and aided in
nonverbal communication, and under arms and between legs where it provided protection and
lubricated moving parts.
As hominin hair became ﬁner, their skin—which was light because it had been covered by hair

4
As hominin hair became ﬁner, their skin—which was light because it had been covered by hair
—adapted to the damaging UV rays in intense, equatorial sunlight. As a result, these African
hominins developed beau fully protective, low-la tude-adapted dark skin. Incidentally, light-
colored skin re-emerged much later in hominin populations that migrated to high la tude
environments in Eurasia where lack of pigmentation maximized vitamin-D production. Gene c
and fossil evidence suggest that the ini al ﬁning of hominin hair and emergence of protective
pigmentation and sweat glands occurred by ~2.3 Mya with the emergence of Homo habilis, the
ﬁrst members of our genus.
Importantly, selection for the ability to reliably harvest high-calorie meat and to survive on the
plains—where every bush could hide a predator—produced a positive feedback that
con nuously improved cogni on. Said diﬀerently, for hominins to successfully hunt calorie-rich
animals and avoid being eaten required improved planning, mental mapping, cooperation,
cleverness, and tools. Of course, this required a larger more-complex information processing
organ (brain), which required more calories, which required increased cogni on, and so on.
Incidentally, you are reading this paragraph because of the brain produced by this positive
feedback loop.
These adaptations and processes eventually produced Homo erectus bodies that were
exquisitely ﬁne-tuned for killing at a distance. They did this by throwing specialized spears and
by developing ability as ‘persistence hunters’. In this form of harves ng calorie-rich meat a
group of hunters iden fy and isolate a large member of a herd, chase the animal un l it drops
from heat exhaus on, and then ﬁnish it oﬀ at rela vely close distance. H. Erectus spears could
kill from as far as 200 feet (60 m). These spears were similar in size and weight distribution to
the modern javelins used by female Olympic athletes.

Molding Homo erectus into Anatomically-Modern Homo sapien

Homo erectus is the longest-lived species of our genus. Their nearly two million year existence
witnesses to their tremendous success. Many of their a ributes and behaviors were remarkably
human, but H. erectus were not human. The transi on that eventually molded H. erectus
bodies into Homo sapiens resulted mostly from con nued brain molding.
Anatomically modern Homo sapiens are hominins whose fossil skeletons are indis nguishable
from those of modern humans but whose ar facts indicate that lacked fully modern behaviors
like complex culture and widespread art. The characteris cs that anatomically modern humans
shared with behaviorally-modern humans include ﬁne hair, abundant sweat glands, large ‘pre-
frontal cortexes’, thin bodies, powerfully ﬂexible shoulders, vice-like teeth and jaws, and
advanced ﬁne motor skills. In addi on, these archaic humans used language and clothing, built
huts and complex tools, controlled and used ﬁre, lived in small family groups, and provided
extensive training throughout prolonged childhoods. Anatomically modern humans were
excep onally well-adapted for persistence hun ng and hunter-gatherer lifestyles.
The earliest anatomically modern H. sapiens emerged from a transi onal species like H.
heidelbergensis or H. bodoensis by ~300 kya. This was followed by the progressive emergence

5
heidelbergensis or H. bodoensis by ~300 kya. This was followed by the progressive emergence
of modern behaviors like habitual clothing, which emerged by ~170 kya, and art and ritualized
burial, which appear by ~100 kya. Our species became behaviorally modern by ~40 kya. These
modern behaviors include widespread, diversely-specialized tools, diets, and art. Table 4.13 lists
important events in the emergence of H. sapiens, and Figure 4.59 illustrates some important
a ributes of anatomically modern humans.
Table 4.13. Human Evolution Timeline

Figure 4.59. Images showing several important Homo sapiens a ributes. (Author illustration;
map and skeleton form Wikimedia; Hunter-gatherer photos from Shu erstock)
Homo sapiens bodies are reﬁned Homo erectus bodies. Said diﬀerently, human bodies resulted
from con nued selection for the ability to successfully hunt large grassland mammals. Said a
third way, the broad scale opportuni es, obstacles, and adaptations associated with the
emergence of H. sapiens bodies were extensions of those that produced H. erectus bodies.
During the transi on that produced modern H. sapiens, H. erectus bodies changed very little
from the neck down, leaving running and throwing abilities essen ally unchanged. In contrast,

6
from the neck down, leaving running and throwing abilities essen ally unchanged. In contrast,
signiﬁcant changes occurred above the neck—to the skull, brain, and associated cogni on.
Notably, the rela ve brain size of H. sapiens is among the largest of any organism that has ever
lived on Earth. The only known organism to compare are our cousin species, the Neanderthals
and Denisovans.
Not only are our brains larger and more complex, they contain dispropor onately large frontal
lobes. This part of our brain lies behind our foreheads. It facilitates human decision making,
planning, voluntary muscle control, and social interaction. The enlargement of H. sapiens
frontal lobes required skull molding that pushed the forehead nose-ward over the brow ridge,
giving H. sapiens our remarkably ﬂat faces. Not only did the enhanced cogni on of enlarged
brains improve hun ng eﬃciency, it increased socialization and enhanced ability to make and
use increasingly diverse and complex tools.
Brains consume a signiﬁcant por on of a body’s energy, and modern human brains emerged
during a period of rapid climate change. As such, the development of modern brains molded H.
sapiens bodies capable of carrying with them the energy needed to maintain brain function.
These strong selective pressures made H. sapiens bodies excep onally adept at storing energy
(adding fat) during mes of plenty and using fat during mes of scarcity.
So, if you struggle with your weight, don’t get too frustrated. Discouraging as it is today, your
ability to store fat was essen al for the survival of your ancestors. As we’ll discuss later, this
adaptation became a burden to humanity only recently, a er humans began living modern
lifestyles characterized by easy access to consistently abundant, high-calorie, and intensely-
preprocessed food.

Neanderthals and Denisovans

The H. erectus deriva ve from which Homo sapiens emerged inside Africa developed into a
cousin species outside Africa, in Eurasia. These hominins, Neanderthals and Denisovans, were
more similar to each other than they were to H. sapiens. Compared to H. sapiens, they were
shorter, stronger, and more barrel-chested. These a ributes may have been adaptations to the
close-quarters (ambush) hun ng they prac ced. In addi on, our cousins had slightly larger
brains, lemon-shaped skulls, and signiﬁcantly larger eyes, noses, and brow ridges.
Like our species, their bodies were adapted for a hunter-gatherer lifestyle, and they used a
similar toolset, wore clothing, lived in family groups, built shelters, and cooked their food. They
also painted on cave walls, used jewelry, cared for the malformed and elderly, and at mes
ritually buried their dead. It is unclear whether they par cipated in these la er behaviors at the
same level of complexity as H. sapiens. It is clear, however, that they were be er adapted than
our species to cold northerly climates. These ‘northerly’ adaptations included light-colored skin.
Figure 4.60 illustrates several Neanderthal and Denisovan a ributes.
Recall that the nature of living things does not allow a single deﬁni on of species that works in
all cases. Earlier, we used the reproduction-based biological species concept. This deﬁni on

7
all cases. Earlier, we used the reproduction-based biological species concept. This deﬁni on
works poorly for our cousins. Even though persistent diﬀerences existed between
Neanderthals, Denisovans, and H. sapiens over long periods (several hundred thousand years),
gene c data clearly indicates that these species could interbreed and produce fer le oﬀspring.
As a result of this interbreeding, the genomes of modern humans with western Eurasian
ancestry contain up to ~4 % Neanderthal DNA—and those with eastern Eurasia, Paciﬁc, or
Na ve American ancestry contain up to 6 % Denisovan DNA. Notably, the Neanderthal and
Denisovan genomes are largely preserved in modern humanity, because individual modern H.
sapiens preserve diﬀerent por ons of our cousins’ genomes.
In addi on to Neanderthals and Denisovans, humanity has discovered fossils of other recently-
ex nct (by ~50 kya) species of hominins on islands in Southeast Asia. These include the so-
called ‘hobbit species’ (H. ﬂoresiensis) from Indonesia and a species from the Philippines (H.
Luzonensis) with hands that show arboreal adaptations. What’s more, researchers have recently
iden ﬁed genes that don’t belong to H. sapiens, Neanderthals, or Denisovans. It will be
fascina ng to discover which addi onal species interbred with our H. sapiens ancestors—H.
Heidelbergensis? H. erectus?

Figure 4.60. Neanderthal and Denisovan a ributes. Note the reconstruction dressed in modern
clothing. (Author illustration and Neanderthal photo; skeleton photo from Smithsonian
Ins tution, other images from Wikimedia)
Our most recent goal has been to illustrate the lawful character of evolutionary development in
order to help you see how natural processes ac ng on populations across numerous
generations produced the H. sapiens body. We hope that you’ve been able appreciate how
spectacularly-well the predictions of the theory of evolution match the gene c, embryological,
fossil, and other a ributes of living and ancient organisms—including those of modern humans.
As you know, this match between predictions and a ributes witnesses that evolutionary
explanations of human origins contain great explanatory power and abundant truth.
To very broadly and brieﬂy summarize, the characteris cs of human and other bodies indicate

8
To very broadly and brieﬂy summarize, the characteris cs of human and other bodies indicate
that H. sapiens, H. neanderthalensis, and related species are greater-cogni on-adapted versions
of the bodies of H. erectus and its immediate deriva ves. What’s more, fossil a ributes indicate
that H. erectus bodies resulted from molding australopith bodies to succeed as large game
hunters on the plains. Extending farther back, we can think of australopiths as plains-adapted
precursor hominins molded by climate cooling and the associated spread of grasslands, and we
can consider primates as ﬂowering-tree-adapted mammals. Figure 4.61 beau fully illustrates
the development of hominins that produced H. sapiens.
Adding to this history the transi ons that we explored earlier, mammals are ﬁshes that were
molded to eﬃciently live terrestrial lifestyles, bony ﬁshes are predation-adapted so -bodied
ﬁshes, primitive ﬁshes are mobility-adapted simple animals, primitive animals are cooperation-
commi ed colonies of complex cells, eukaryo c cells are symbiosis-dedicated sets of simple
cells, and simple cells began as replica ve inorganic systems adapted to extract energy from
near-surface chemical reactions that stalled when Earth cooled. Figure 4.33 illustrates many of
the broader development states that produced H. sapiens across the history of life. Together
with what we learned earlier about the development of the Universe, atoms, and Earth, this
history comprises most of our journey From Atoms to Humans.

Figure 4.61. Reconstructions of recent stages related to the development of Humans. (Author
illustration; images from John Gurche)
Truly, lawful body molding is a beau fully eﬃcient way to create ‘endless forms most beau ful’.
Even so, some people react nega vely to this natural-process-based explanation for the

9 Even so, some people react nega vely to this natural-process-based explanation for the
development of organisms—especially as it relates to human a ributes like body form and
intellectual capacity. Of course, if God creates as humans do, these strong nega ve reactions
are jus ﬁed—even required—for anyone who believes in a Creator. However, if God creates
lawfully, these reactions are unjus ﬁed and prevent individuals from seeing ‘God’s hand’ in the
lawful workings of nature.
If you react nega vely to natural-process explanations such as those we’ve described, we invite
you to think deeply about why you accept direct divine creation, which pits God’s Words against
His Works, and reject lawful creation, which can reconcile both forms of scripture. We witness
that ‘God’s ways are not our ways’ as it relates to The Ongoing Creation of the Universe, Earth,
and Life—that God did not and does not create as humans do, but rather that nature formed
and forms lawfully (Isaiah 55).