4.11 Moving Backwards while Stepping Forward 
The Cultural, Agricultural and Information Revolutions
Dr. Dan Moore and Dr. Brian Tonks, Geology and Physics Departments, BYU-Idaho

Order is the law of nature, the universal trend, the cosmic direction. If time is an arrow, that
arrow points toward order. The future is pa ern, organization, union, intensiﬁcation. —Alan
Lightman
Learning Objectives:
● Understand the a ributes that dis nguish behaviorally-modern from anatomically-modern Homo
sapiens.
● Understand the basic nature of the following transi ons and be able to iden fy the cause(s),
beneﬁts, and detrimental eﬀects associated with each: the Cultural, Agricultural, Industrial, and
Information Revolutions.

In many respects, our species—Homo sapiens—is one of the most successful to ever inhabit
Earth. Modern humans live on every con nent and in every climate, eat an incredible wide
variety of foods, engage in a mind-bogglingly diverse set of behaviors, and inhabit astonishingly-
artificial environments of our own making. In addi on, our ability to discover, adapt, and
manipulate has given us tremendous power—control that we have used for good and ill. Not
only can modern humans show tremendous restraint, compassion, and crea vity, but we can
also be incredibly selﬁsh, hateful, and destructive.
As we’ve seen, the physical a ributes of humans developed as the organisms that comprise our
lineage passed through important developmental transi ons. Like our physical a ributes,
human behavioral and cultural characteris cs did not appear all at once but instead emerged as
ancestral populations passed through transi ons marked by the complexifying of human
cogni on and culture.
Early human fossils and ar facts—and much later, wri en records—indicate that early, simple
hunter-gather lifestyles transi oned to complex hunter-gatherer and then to se led agrarian,
industrial, and eventually fully-modern lifestyles. These stages are separated by the Cultural,
Agricultural, Industrial, and Information Revolutions. Each transi on profoundly changed
human lifestyles and each progressively isolated humanity from its physical environment.

Simple Hunter-Gatherer Lifestyles 

The earliest humans, which ﬁrst appeared in Africa ~300 kya, lived simple hunter-gatherer
lifestyles similar to those lived by hominins since Homo erectus. The anthropological record and

2
lifestyles similar to those lived by hominins since Homo erectus. The anthropological record and
behaviors of modern hunter-gatherers suggest that these lifestyles involved daily activi es
characterized by ~6 hours of hun ng, gathering, food processing, and tool fabrication; ~5 miles
of walking; ~30 minutes running; and many hours of leisure activity and socialization. These
simple hunter-gatherers likely had few enduring possessions, stored little food, ate a wide
variety of seasonal foods, occasionally went hungry for more than one meal, and moved when
local food sources became rela vely scarce. What’s more, they appear to have lived in rela vely
egalitarian family groups of a few dozen that had little specialization.
These anatomically-but-not-behaviorally-modern humans seem to have lived low stress lives
and enjoyed rela vely good mental, emo onal, and physical health. Compared to modern
humans, infant mortality was quite high, but back problems, heart disease, diabetes, cavi es,
near-sightedness, plague, and diges ve issues were rare. Mothers typically delivered a child
every 3-5 years, but only ~2 of those children survived to adulthood. High infant mortality
meant that average lifespan was ~33 years, but those who survived childhood typically lived
into their 50s and 60s. Among these people, the leading causes of death appear to have been
infection-related diarrhea or pneumonia, followed by accidents and cancer.
These anatomically-modern humans were excep onally well-adapted to their hunter-gatherer
lifestyles. Figure 4.62 illustrates the distribution of important Homo species and the spread of
Homo sapiens across Earth. Behaviorally-modern humanity emerged from this Cultural
Revolution ~40 kya.

Figure 4.62. Where late hominins lived and when H. sapiens migrated into various parts of the
Earth. (Adapted from Wikimedia)

The Cultural Revolution

The Cultural Revolution began by ~170 kya when habitual clothing use emerged, accelerated by
~50 kya, and included the development of traits such as language, simple art, and occasional

3
~50 kya, and included the development of traits such as language, simple art, and occasional
ritual burial (Figure 4.57). By the end of the Cultural Revolution, at ~40 kya, our ancestors had
developed:
● Increasingly complex, specialized, and diverse tools, including locally-designed atlatls,
ﬁshhooks, sewing needles, and harpoons
● Signiﬁcantly more diverse and specialized diets, including abundant use of small animals like
ﬁsh, shellﬁsh, rabbits, and birds
● More diverse and abundant art, including pain ngs, ﬁgurines, musical instruments, and
jewelery
● The ability to recognize astronomical pa erns like those formed by the movement of the
Sun and visible planets
● Enhanced social complexity, including care of the inﬁrm and elderly and, eventually,
coordinated large-scale construction
● Widespread and rela vely elaborate ritualized burial of the dead
● The ability and drive to solve the problems encountered as humanity spread across the
globe
Notably, Neanderthals and their cousins—the last of the hominins with which Homo sapiens
coexisted—became ex nct ~35 kya, not long a er the Cultural Revolution. Although it is
unclear whether this was related to the revolution, the ming suggests a connection.
The achievements listed above mark the emergence of behaviorally-modern Homo sapiens
and signal important increases in human cogni on. These and earlier cognitive improvements
correlate to increases in both overall brain size and the size of the ‘pre-frontal lobe’—the large
part of the brain that lies behind our foreheads and plays important roles in the cognitive skills
required to be successful at-a-distance hunters.
Signiﬁcantly, early humans used these skills—decision making, planning, spa al reasoning, and
cooperation—in all areas of life, not just hun ng. As a result, the improved cogni on that
allowed our genus to eﬃciently harvest plains meat using weak slow bodies that lacked sharp
teeth and claws eventually complexiﬁed human culture. These enhancements included the
emergence of complex social interactions, value judgments, and the ability to formulate and
communicate increasingly abstract ideas across many generations, including worldviews that
included a belief in life a er death. In these ways, increased cogni on produced the Cultural
Revolution, the culmina ng emergence of modern human behavior.
Behaviorally-modern humans lived what can be considered complex hunter-gather lifestyles—
ways of life that were far more diverse, specialized, and complex than the simple hunter-
gatherer lifestyles from which they emerged. We illustrate these complex lifestyles using two
sites that span the period between the Cultural and Agricultural Revolutions—Vogelherd Cave
and Göbekli Tepe.
The seasonal occupation of Vogelherd Cave in southwestern Germany included both
Neanderthals and our species. Ar facts found in cave sediments from ~40 kya record human
occupation by complex hunter-gatherers (see Figure 4.63). The physical record of post-Cultural-

4 occupation by complex hunter-gatherers (see Figure 4.63). The physical record of post-Cultural-
Revolution sites like Vogelherd Cave indicate that these complex hunter-gatherers engaged in
social, cultural, religious, ar s c, and other cognitive activities indis nguishable from those of
historical hunter-gatherers. In other words, the evidence suggests that circumstances—not
ability—separated these complex hunter-gatherers from modern humanity.

Figure 4.63. Photos of Vogelherd Cave and ﬁnger-sized ar facts found in an occupation layer
formed near the end of the Cultural Revolution. (Author photographs)
More than 11,000 years ago, not long before the agricultural revolution, coopera ng troops of
complex hunter-gatherers at Göbekli Tepe began building monumental structures on a hilltop
overlooking a vast, fer le plain in southeast Turkey. Over the next ~2,000 years, similar groups
built ~20 adjacent ritual enclosures. Figure 4.64 shows the remains of one such temple and a
pillar from another. The temple complex at Göbekli Tepe was inten onally buried some me
a er 8,000 B.C. It remained buried un l serious excavation began in the 1990s.

Figure 4.64. Le : Photos illustra ng the monumental structures built by coopera ng bands of
complex hunter-gatherers at Göbekli Tepe before the Agricultural Revolution. Note the arms,
hands, and loincloth carvings on the Building-C pillar, a stylized human. Right: A pain ng of an
early agrarian se lement at the base of the Göbekli Tepe hilltop sanctuary. (Author
photographs and illustration)

5

The sanctuary complex at Göbekli Tepe contains ~200 large limestone pillars, stone tables,
small basins, polished ﬂoors, and numerous carvings. None of the carvings depict violence. The
largest pillars are ~20 (6 m) tall, up to ~10 (3 m) across, and weigh ~30,000 pounds (13,000
kg). These pillars were carved with ﬂint tools from local quarries, li ed into pre-carved bases,
and surrounded by stone-brick walls. The sanctuaries do not appear to have had roofs.
The nature of human and butchered-animal remains from the site indicate that Göbekli Tepe
was the des nation of seasonal ritual pilgrimages of hunter-gatherer troops, some from ~90
miles (150 km) away. The a ributes of this hilltop sanctuary also witness to a long and
impressive tradi on of engineering and ar s c accomplishment, regionally-shared cultural
beliefs, and large-scale cooperation amongst separate troops of complex hunter-gatherers.
The abstract cultural reasons that produced such coordinated large-scale construction must
have been compelling indeed—especially when considering that these sanctuaries were built
before humanity cra ed po ery or domes cated of plants and animals. Notably, Göbekli Tepe
witnesses that shared worldviews involving temples were a powerful part of the lives of at least
some groups of complex hunter-gatherers before village life, civilization, and wri ng.
What’s more, this hilltop sanctuary was not alone. Other such complexes have been discovered
in the region, and the complexity of post-Cultural-Revolution hunter-gatherers is also recorded
at sites on other con nents. These include the earthen construction at Poverty Point, Louisiana,
USA and tens of thousands of stone-pillar complexes in Europe—some of which, like
Stonehenge, are astronomically aligned.
In short, evidence from numerous sites record the capacity of the peoples for the rapid,
substan ve, regional innovation that emerged during the Cultural Revolution. Before this
transi on, the tools and behaviors of simple hunter-gatherers ancestors varied little from one
troop to another or across con nents or millennia. In contrast, the tools, diets, worldviews, and
other behaviors of the complex hunter-gatherers that emerged from the Cultural Revolution
were diverse and record signiﬁcant changes across rela vely small regions and a few
generations.
Thus, not only does the Cultural Revolution represent a watershed in the type and abundance
of change, it marks a tremendous increase in the rate of specialized innovations. Moreover, the
Cultural Revolution represents a ‘ pping point’ in the development of human cogni on—a
period during which the drivers of increased cogni on transi oned from biological processes
(like the need to eﬃciently harvest calorie-rich plains meat) to cultural processes (like solving
social problems, designing and crea ng art, and thinking deeply about the nature of the human
condi on).
This view is strengthened by considering the nature of the Agricultural, Industrial, and
Information Revolutions that followed the Cultural Revolution. Each of these transi ons
progressively separated humanity from its biological environment and increasingly replaced the

6 progressively separated humanity from its biological environment and increasingly replaced the
hunter-gatherer lifestyles—for which human bodies are exquisitely well adapted—with the
artificial, culturally-controlled lifestyles to which our bodies have not yet adapted.
Thus, although each revolution tremendously blessed humanity, only the Cultural Revolution
produced few detrimental eﬀects. Understanding both the beneﬁts and the drawbacks of the
Agricultural, Industrial, and Information Revolutions will allow you to clearly contextualize the
modern world you inhabit.

The Agricultural Revolution

During the Agricultural (Neolithic) Revolution complex hunter-gatherers began living se led
agricultural lifestyles. The earliest agricultural revolution resulted primarily from climate
warming associated with the end of the last glacial period. This warming was neither slow nor
steady. Instead, emerging periods of rela vely temperate climate could cool rapidly, some mes
in as little as a few years.
Most of the human behaviors that comprise agrarian lifestyles ﬁrst appear in the Middle East
near the transi on to the current interglacial period, long before the ﬁrst agricultural revolution.
For example, plant cul vation by hunter-gatherers dates to at least 23 kya and the
domes cation of wolves into dogs may have occurred much earlier. By ~15 kya por ons of the
Middle East contained abundant plains animals like gazelles and plen ful vegetable foods like
wild cereals, peas, and almonds. These resources provided a kind of year-round paradise for
troops of hunter-gatherers known as Natuﬁans.
Without the need to move seasonally for food, Natuﬁans built humanity’s ﬁrst permanent
villages. In these small se lements, they cul vated food plants, made beau ful art, traded with
distant groups for exo c goods, began storing food and material goods, and buried their dead in
elaborate graves—but they did not farm or care for animals, at least not consistently or in
abundance. In other words, the Natuﬁans were sedentary hunter-gathers.
Then, at ~12.8 kya, a par cularly severe cooling event called the Younger Dryas (Figure 3.47)
returned the Northern Hemisphere to glacial-period condi ons for ~1200 years. This rapid and
extreme cooling disrupted the Natuﬁan way of life. Archaeological observations indicate that
some Natuﬁan communities returned to hunter-gatherer lifestyles, but others ‘dug in’ and
began deliberately cul va ng both plant and animal foods. One such se lement, near Göbekli
Tepe, is illustrated in Figure 4.64. Dozens of se lements like this have been found, including the
occupation of Jericho beginning ~13 kya (~11,000 BC).
By the end of the Younger Dryas cold period ~11.7 kya, agrarian lifestyles were ﬁrmly
established among Natuﬁan-descended groups in the Middle East. As such, 11.7 kya marks the
end of the ﬁrst agricultural revolution and the beginning of the Age of Agriculture, which
included profound changes to human lifestyles.
The Neolithic Revolution beneﬁted humanity in the following ways:

7

● Food abundance increased, in part because agriculturalists can generate many more
calories per person than hunter-gatherers. This allowed human populations and
population density to skyrocket.
● The storage of food increased food security and the accumulation of material goods
greatly increased the ready availability of specialized tools, clothing, and other
commodi es.
● Opportunities for training and education increased because food surpluses and more
complex socie es allowed individuals to spend a greater por on of early life mastering
specialized skills.
● Individual specialization and societal complexity increased, producing early occupations
and stra ﬁed socie es.
● Human accomplishments increased.
Accompanying these beneﬁcial eﬀects were the following detrimental consequences:
● Food diversity and quality decreased, and diets became richer in carbohydrates, which
increased the incidence of cavi es.
● The threat of serious famine grew because reliance on just a few types of foods
increased the exposure of se led populations to specialized disasters, like widespread
sickness of a plant crop or food herd.
● Disease, especially plagues, increased. Plague diseases and large-scale population
collapse were rare in hunter-gatherer socie es because their camps were rela vely
clean, they moved often, and their populations were too small for disease to spread
widely. In contrast, disease spread easily in se led communities that had higher
population density, lacked eﬀective sanitations, and lived in close proximity with food
animals. During this me, humans acquired many diseases from extended close contact
with farm animals and with vermin such as rats, cockroaches, and ﬂeas. These diseases,
became a major cause of human illness and death, included cholera, smallpox, bubonic
plague, measles, mumps, and rubella.
● The incidence of back, shoulder, and knee problems rose because human bodies are
poorly adapted to agrarian work.
● The length of the workday increased, from ~5 to ~10 hours. This le little time for
leisure and socialization. Said diﬀerently, the Agricultural Revolution caused humanity to
‘eat our food by the sweat of our brow’ (Gen 3).
● Overall human health worsened and average lifespan decreased by ~40%, from ~33 to
~20 years—in large part because of increases in infant mortality.
● Social stra ﬁcation increased and social equality decreased.
● Warfare became more deadly and widespread. Hunter-gatherer warfare tends to be
highly ritualized, but city-on-city warfare can be distressingly brutal.
Most people readily acknowledge the wonderfully beneﬁcial aspects of the Agricultural
Revolution, but few are familiar with the signiﬁcant nega ve consequences of this transi on.
Notably, many of the nega ve consequences of this transi on were not minimized by humanity
un l the mid-1900s, and some remain untreated even today.

8

Following the ﬁrst Agricultural Revolution in the Middle East, other human populations
transi oned to agrarian lifestyles. For example, the Neolithic Revolution occurred in China by
~9 kya, in Papua New Guinea by ~6 kya, and in Central Mexico, northern South America, sub-
Saharan Africa, and eastern North America by ~4 kya. Each of these areas was characterized by
a dis nct set of domes cated plants and animals, some of which are listed in Table 4.14.
Table 4.14. Examples of plants and animals domes cated by humans in diﬀerent areas.

Figure 4.65. Images of the early city Çatalhöyük. (Author illustration and photographs, except
for Wikimedia photos of the reconstructed village and home)
During the Age of Agriculture, humans socie es expanded and complexiﬁed—eventually
producing large ci es, civilizations, and societal accomplishments like wri ng, detailed
astronomy, and cri cal philosophy. Remarkably, the lifestyles of inhabitants in these early ci es
diﬀer little from those of more recent pre-industrial ci es—as illustrated in Figure 4.65 by

9 diﬀer little from those of more recent pre-industrial ci es—as illustrated in Figure 4.65 by
Çatalhöyük, an early city in southern Turkey that was inhabited for from ~9.1-7.7 kya
(7,100-5,700 BC).
As socie es spread during the Age of Agriculture, human populations mixed. These exchanges
of foods, diseases, and worldviews were often one-sided. For example, the ‘Columbian
Exchange’ brought European populations, which had developed resistance to the diseases
carried by cattle, sheep, and pigs, into contact with Na ve American populations with no such
resistance. This caused mass die-oﬀs of American populations, where mortality rates often
exceeded 85%.
During this mixing event, Europeans ‘exchanged’ Na ve American precious metals and foods
for death, disease, slavery, and mistreatment in nearly every form. Tragically, European
populations exploded when they began cul va ng high-calorie American potatoes. These
expanding populations sent more Europeans to the very areas that had been devastated by
European diseases. Although at least partly unintended, this unjust and heartbreaking colonial
‘exchange’ stained the honor of humanity and represents an ill that has not yet been rec ﬁed.

The Industrial Revolution

During the Age of Agriculture, which has endured for nearly twelve thousand years, humans
used their bodies or the bodies of animals to accomplish the diﬃcult work of agrarian life. At
this me, a galloping horse was the fastest mode of transportation and an ox-drawn wagon or
small boat were the best ways to move goods. The Industrial Revolution transformed
humanity’s agrarian world by using the energy stored in fossil fuels to move machines—
instruments that carried out formerly backbreaking, repe ve tasks with rela ve ease.
The Industrial Revolution began in Great Britain during the 1760s with the inven on of the
steam engine. Somewhat surprisingly, this transi on was fueled by the inexpensive production
and distribution of high-quality clothing. In the late 1700s the Bri sh Empire began transpor ng
colony-grown raw materials like co on toftengland where machine labor produced goods like
clothing that the empire transported to markets around the globe, including back to the
colonies. Ini ally, most machine labor was fueled by the coal that had formed in the early
forested swamplands we discussed earlier.
Although ini ally focused on clothing production, during the 1800s industrialization reached
other sectors, like food processing. Then, in the late 1900s, industrialization reached food
production. This ini ated what is often called the Second Agricultural Revolution.
At the core of the Industrial Revolution lies a positive feedback between the improved
productivity provided by machines and the increases in human specialization required by
machines. Consider, for example, the eﬀects of steam-powered looms. These looms allowed
humanity to inexpensively mass-produce high-quality clothing. At the same me, the looms
required specialists in physical science, engineering, agriculture, animal husbandry, yarn
production, loom operation and repair, and so on—not to men on the specializations

10 production, loom operation and repair, and so on—not to men on the specializations
associated with construc ng and maintaining the buildings that housed the looms, transpor ng
the raw materials and ﬁnished products, fabrica ng the cloth into clothing, and so on. In me,
positive feedbacks like these produced the increasingly-specialized socie es that characterize
modern civilizations.

Figure 4.66. Photos of detrimental aspects of the Industrial Revolution. (Author illustration,
images from Wikimedia)
Like the Agricultural Revolution, the Industrial Revolution produced both great beneﬁt and
tremendous harm. The beneﬁcial consequences included increased productivity, improved
transportation, higher standards of living, enhanced communication, increased food
abundance, and greatly expanded human accomplishments in nearly every area of endeavor.
During this time human population rapidly expanded. Sadly, the detrimental consequences
included the failure of co age industries, a growing gap between rich and poor, increasingly
powerful elite classes, longer work days and less leisure me, squalid and unsafe working and
living condi ons (including for children), unsustainable use of Earth’s natural resources, severe
pollution, decreased human health, and increased plague (see Figure 4.66).
As is often the case, many of the detriments grew directly from the beneﬁts. For example,
increased access to education is a great blessing, but requiring ever-more education can be a
burden for some. Early in the Industrial Age, even minimal education or training greatly
improved individual opportunity. Later, ever-more education was required to provide the same
opportunity. Today, master’s degrees are required for most professional careers, while those
with bachelor’s degree ﬁnd employment mostly at the technician level—and high-school-only
educations often lead only to hourly work.

The Information Revolution 

The Information Revolution began in the 1960s and 70s with the acceleration of electronic
compu ng and the inven on of personal compu ng. Recently, the development of the Internet
and cell phones have formed core aspects of this revolution. These innovations fueled the
development of many of the activities that pervade modern life. These include space travel,
online education and gaming, streaming video, and so on.
In the last half century, compu ng power has increased while cost has decreased. For example,
the room-sized IBM computers of the 60s cost the 2020-equivalent of ~20 million dollars. In
contrast, personal computers in 2020, including those inside smart phones, are many millions of

11 contrast, personal computers in 2020, including those inside smart phones, are many millions of
mes more powerful but cost only a few hundred dollars. Figure 4.67 illustrates some of the
developments.

Figure 4.67. Photos illustra ng the evolution of computers. (Author illustration, images from
Wikimedia)
The impact of the Information Revolution on humanity’s capacity to innovate is diﬃcult to
overstate. Consider, for example, the diminishing costs and increasing quality of space travel
enabled by the Information Age. Between 1960 and 1973, the U.S. spent ~300 billion inﬂation-
adjusted dollars on the space program. Since then, the cost has steadily decreased, while safety
and quality have increased. For example, the cost to launch a payload into space in the 1970s
was ~$100,000 per pound, in the early 2000s it was ~$10,000 per pound, and in the late 2010s
it was just ~$1000 per pound. Current projections es mate that by ~2050 the cost will be a few
dollars per pound. Believe it or not, it is likely that space travel will become available to the
everyday person within your life mes, due in large part to increases in compu ng power.
Although the Information Age is still young, some of its consequences are readily apparent. For
example, obvious beneﬁts include improved communication and access to information,
increased specialization, higher average standard of living, and enhanced societal
accomplishments. On the ﬂipside, obvious detrimental consequences include decreases in
physical activity, socialization, and mental health; the devaluation of knowledge; diminished
language proﬁciency; and increased concentration of wealth and power to elites.
Although many people live as if modern life represents ‘the way things have always been’, this
perspective is deeply ﬂawed. Modern lifestyles are far from normal. They are far from the
hunter-gatherer lifestyles for which the human body is well adapted. Moreover, modern social
pressures are changing human lifestyles ever-more-quickly. Consider, for example, that modern
lifestyles account for just 3 of the ~60,000 generations of our species’ existence. Given the
accelera ng speed of humanity’s cultural evolution, our present challenge is to ﬁnd ways to
enjoy the beneﬁts and minimize the detrimental consequences of the Agricultural, Industrial,
and Information Revolutions—while an cipa ng and doing our best to prepare for future
cultural revolutions.