4.12 Playing Basketball with Footballs
Evolutionary Mismatch Diseases
Dr. Dan Moore and Dr. Brian Tonks, Geology and Physics Departments, BYU-Idaho

Although nature needs thousands or millions of years to create a new species, man needs only a
few dozen years to destroy one. —Victor Scheﬀer
Learning Objectives:
● Understand how modern cultural lifestyles diﬀer from ancient natural lifestyles for which the
human body is well adapted. Also, understand how these diﬀerences produce evolutionary
mismatch diseases.
● Iden fy the lifestyle mismatches that explain widespread modern diseases and ailments such as
diabetes, heart disease, cavi es, and near-sightedness. Also, iden fy a solution for these
evolutionary mismatch diseases.

The Agricultural, Industrial, and Information Revolutions that produced modern cultures
provide contemporary humanity with advantages and opportunities nearly inconceivable to
ancient humans. Partly for this reason, modern humans typically think of their complex hunter-
gatherer ancestors as backwards, unfortunate people. They were neither. In fact, there is much
to recommend hunter-gather lifestyles. The beneﬁts include abundant leisure me, improved
physical ﬁtness, low incidence of mental illness, social ﬂexibility, and reduced exposure to
plague, war, and famine.
These beneﬁts result primarily from this important reality: physical selection across numerous
generations ﬁne-tuned human bodies for hunter-gatherer lifestyles. In contrast, cultural
selection across a few generations has placed modern humanity in increasingly-artificial
lifestyles for which our bodies are poorly adapted. Important mismatches between modern
cultural lifestyles and ancient natural lifestyles are summarized in Table 4.15 and illustrated in
Figure 4.68. Take a few moments to contemplate the discrepancies.
Table 4.15. Developing mismatches between hunter-gatherer and modern lifestyles.

2

Figure 4.68. Photos of a hunter-gatherer family foraging in African and a modern American
male trying to relieve stress following a long day of oﬃce work. (Author illustration, images
from Shu erstock)
The theory of evolution predicts that the biological ﬁtness of populations should diminish as
mismatches between their a ributes and their environments increase. Said diﬀerently,
evolution predicts that widespread ailments—so-called evolutionary mismatch diseases—
should appear in populations whose characteris cs are no longer well matched to their physical
environment. Such maladies are readily apparent when comparing the leading causes of death,
average lifespans, and common maladies of human populations through time.
Archaeological, historical, and modern observations indicate that hunter-gatherers most often
died of infection-caused pneumonia or diarrhea, accident, or cancer. Notably absent from this
list are the leading causes of death following the Agricultural Revolution—heart disease,
diabetes, and plague, all of which mismatch diseases. Diabetes and heart disease result from
meager exercise, high stress, and overabundance of heavily preprocessed high-carbohydrate-
and-high-fat foods, and plague is a consequence of extended close contact with food animals
and of the ever-increasing densities of human populations.

Figure 4.69. Photos showing some of the eﬀects of plague. (Author illustration, images from
Wikimedia)
Because widespread plague occurs infrequently, most people underes mate the historical
impact of these deadly diseases. These communicable diseases include smallpox, black death
(bubonic plague), measles, mumps, typhus, whooping cough, malaria, and yellow fever.
Essen ally all of these diseased moved to humans from food animals like cattle and chickens

3 Essen ally all of these diseased moved to humans from food animals like cattle and chickens
and pest animals like ﬂeas and mosquitoes. Figure 4.69 illustrates the physiological eﬀects of
two of these diseases, smallpox and bubonic plague.
Sadly, these diseases spread easily through high-density human populations with poor
sanitation and without the knowledge to combat them. What’s more, globalization and
population expansion since the early 1900s have ensured the global consequences of recent
and future outbreaks. Use Table 4.16, which lists documented episodes of plague that killed
signiﬁcant fractions of Western humanity, to explore the eﬀects of plague on humanity.
Table 4.16. Recent eﬀects of plague on the Western world

It’s diﬃcult to overstate how signiﬁcantly plague has aﬀected humanity since the Agricultural
Revolution. For example, so many people died in Europe and North Africa during the
1331-1353 bubonic plague events that population didn’t rebound un l the 1500s, nearly two
hundred years later. Even worse, the plagues unleashed by European contact on Na ve
American populations caused more than 80 out of every 100 people to die. The grief and
cultural devastation of Na ve Peoples that began with the introduction of European and
African diseases is nearly incalculable.
Sadly, among some groups of modern peoples, people have stopped immunizing their children
against these serious communicable diseases. These individuals argue that immunizations
cause au sm, are now unnecessary, or expose children to unnecessary risk. Intensive scientiﬁc
research has falsiﬁed the vaccine-au sm connection asserted by the specious study that
spawned the concern. (See, for example, Rao and Andrade’s 2011 ar cle The MMR vaccine and
au sm: Sensation, refutation, retraction, and fraud.) Sadly, these diseases have made recent
comebacks among those that choose to not immunize. These comeback have reversed the
gains made by immunization campaigns begun in the mid 1900s, which had nearly eradicated
diseases like measles and smallpox. Finally, although all medical treatments contain risk
(immunization included) the societal beneﬁts of immunization far outweigh these rela vely
small risks. From our perspective, those who fail to immunize their children against these
plagues are misinformed or behaving selﬁshly, though often uninten onally.

4
In addi on to aﬀec ng how humans die, our cultural revolutions have aﬀected how long we
live, as illustrated in Figure 4.70. As you can see, both ‘average age at death’ and ‘average
lifespan’ dropped precipitously—by ~25%—following the Agricultural Revolution. These
changes resulted from signiﬁcant increases in infant mortality, generally diminished health,
increased plague, and the changes in cause of death described above.
For many, these trends make little sense because they perceive humanity’s march to the
present as unqualiﬁed progress. The reality is that each of humanity’s cultural transi ons
involved both important advantages and signiﬁcant disadvantages. Truly, there is ‘opposi on in
all things’, including in progress. Thus, as humanity passed through these revolutions, we
‘moved backward while stepping forward’ in much the same way one does when hiking up a
sand dune.
Today, modern humans live in artificial, culturally-selected-for environments with bodies
designed for very diﬀerent lifestyles—which is akin to ‘playing basketball with an American
football’, an endeavor replete with ‘unusual bounces’. As a result, our present situation is
strange indeed because artificial culturally-driven selection has isolated humanity from most
aspects of our biological environment. What’s more, the pace of human lifestyle change is
accelera ng.

Figure 4.70. Human lifespans since the emergence of anatomically-modern humans. Note the
central ‘trough’ and the cause of its appearance and disappearance. Can you iden fy the eﬀects
of World War I and II on the regional lifespan curves? (Adapted from unknown source)

Thankfully, the very progress that produced the downturn in human longevity eventually led to
the emergence of scientiﬁc health care. This development produced the huge upswing in life
expectancies around 1900. For emphasis, we’ll say that again: the emergence of scientiﬁc
knowledge related to health allowed humanity to treat many of the disadvantages that resulted
from earlier cultural revolutions. These treatments include an bio c solutions to bacterial
infections and surgical treatment of diet-and-exercise-damaged hearts.

5
This powerful perspective places modern medicine in it’s righ ul context, as one of humanity’s
best tools for healing revolution-induced maladies and for helping humanity adjust to ever-
accelera ng lifestyle changes. In addi on to these important medical issues, humanity must
also ﬁnd poli cal solutions to the large regional inequities in access to scientiﬁc health care so
apparent in Figure 4.70.

In addi on to aﬀec ng cause of death and lifespan, modern lifestyles have also produced
mismatch ailments such as widespread near-sightedness, back and neck problems, and
cramped wisdom teeth. Table 4.17 lists demonstrated and hypothesized associations between
modern ailments and evolutionary mismatches. Signiﬁcantly, the presence of these mismatches
fails to falsify important predictions of the theory of evolution regarding the evolutionary origin
of human bodies.
Table 4.17. Demonstrated and hypothesized evolutionary mismatch diseases.

Fortunately, there is much we can do to combat the detriments of our modern lifestyles.
Obvious examples include becoming more active and modifying our diets, by diminishing
consump on of carbohydrate-and-fat-rich foods. In addi on, many problems can be prevented
during youth by training children to eat wisely and exercise, allowing them to be moderately
exposed to pathogens (such as by playing in the dirt), and by immunizing them against plague
diseases.

A Final Word

We hope you’ve enjoyed this last, living part of our journey From Atoms to Humans. In recent
chapters we explored the witness of natural scripture regarding the progression of organismal
states and transi ons that produced modern humans (from primates, mammals, rep les, …,
primitive ﬁshes, …). If you have found this witness confounding or oﬀensive, consider it’s
harmonious and complementary twin, the witness of wri en scripture. God’s Words likewise
report that life formed from inanimate matter (from Earth ‘dust’), that the emergence of
diﬀerent organisms occurred at diﬀerent stages in the development of life, and that human
bodies were molded into their present form. Although the wri en account of The Creation was

6
bodies were molded into their present form. Although the wri en account of The Creation was
purpose-oriented rather than process-focused, it is comfor ng to note the broad-scale
similarity of these two powerful witnesses, God’s Words and Works.
As we close this section and prepare toftend our time together, we invite you to assess what you
have learned during our exploration of the development of life and humans. What fresh
perspectives have you found? In what ways has your understanding of biological evolution
changed or been strengthened? Do you see your relationship to our hominin and earlier
ancestors the same, or diﬀerently? Have apparent conﬂicts between scientiﬁc and religious
accounts of Creation diminished?
As with the earlier natural systems we inves gated, we witness that God created Life. That is,
we witness that natural processes and lawful interactions produced and developed living
organisms, including Homo sapiens.