

4.2 Discoursing With Dinosaurs
What Life Can Teach Us and How We Learn It
Dr. Dan Moore and Dr. Alan Holyoak, Geology and Biology Departments, BYU-Idaho

The facts of nature are what they are. ―Stephen Jay Gould

Learning Objectives:
● Understand how scien sts determine the sequence, age, and nature of biological events using
observations of the structure and composition of biological materials and an understanding of
biological processes. Also, understand how molecular clocks work.
● Iden fy what biological materials like body parts, genes, fossils, and fossil traces record about
present and past organisms.
● Understand how rocks and fossils record information about the environmental conditions that
existed when they formed.
● Iden fy how a past biological event like ex nction or speciation might be recorded for modern
observers.

The history of Life on Earth consists of the events associated with the origin and development
of all organisms. To understand this history, scien sts must establish the sequence, age, and
nature of past biological events. Scien sts determine the sequence of biological events using
the principles of relative dating, establish the age of a biological events using radiometric and
molecular clocks, and discover the nature of biological events by interpreting the structure and
composition of biological materials. Like the Universe and Earth, discovering how Life
developed is both exciting and rewarding.

Basic Biological Materials and Processes
The bodies of all living things are made of the same biological molecules—carbohydrates, lipids,
proteins, and nucleic acids (Figure 4.16). Of course, living things also use materials such as
water, salts, and trace metals. Some biological materials can directly enter bodies and require
li le processing. The remainder must be built by organisms. The diversity, composition, and
structure of biological molecules are vital to the health and success of all living things.
Carbohydrates like glucose and cellulose are used for energy and structural support. Lipids are
made with the help of protein enzymes and can be used for long-term storage of excess energy
(fats and oils), as structural components of cell membranes (phospholipids), protective
materials (waxes), and as molecules that carry signals within and between cells (steroid
hormones). Proteins are long strings of amino acids that fold into shapes that determine their
function. These functions include facilitating chemical reactions and regulating gene expression.
Nucleic acids, which include DNA and RNA, carry genetic instructions for making proteins.


Figure 4.17 shows how genes produce proteins.

Figure 4.16. Illustrations of basic types of biological molecules. Organisms use these molecules
for energy, structure, signaling, information storage, and sotion. (Author illustration, images
from Wikimedia)

Figure 4.17. Le : Illustration of the protein synthesis process: 1- Gene transcription produces
messenger-RNA (mRNA), with complementary ‘genetic le ers’ (nucleobases). 2- mRNA is
modiﬁed before leaving the nucleus. 3- mRNA leaves the nucleus, enters the cytoplasm, and
encounters a ribosome. 4- The ribosome translates mRNA by connecting each three-le er
mRNA word (codon) with an amino acid. In this way successive ‘train cars’ of amino acids are
connected to form a protein ‘train’. 5- Once produced, proteins fold into speciﬁc shapes. 6-
Interactions atter translation determine the ﬁnal shapes of proteins. These shapes determine
protein function. Right: Illustration of the universal genetic code (read from the inside, out)
showing the ‘genetic words’ (codons) that correspond to par cular amino acids (outer circle).
‘Start’ and ‘stop’ codons ini ate or end proteins. (Author illustration, images from Wikimedia)

3
As organisms grow and develop, the basic molecules of life self-assemble to produce larger-
scale biological materials like ssues. Speciﬁc combinations of ssues make familiar body parts
called organs. These include the heart, eyes, and bones.
atter death, organisms can no longer maintain their bodies, which begin to decay. Body
components like oils, sugars, and muscles readily decompose. Other components such as
tendons, ligaments, bone, and wood take longer to break down. Biological materials that persist
long enough to be buried in layers of sediment can become fossils. As such, durable materials
such as shells and teeth most easily form fossils. Likewise, organisms that live where sediment
is readily deposited (as on the ocean ﬂoor) are much more commonly preserved as fossils.
Once buried, the long-term processes that form rock from sediment can produce fossils from
biological remains. Fossilization can preserve many of the properties of the original organism.

Interpreting Biological Materials

Recall that understanding the history of life requires determining the sequence, age, and nature
of biological events. This involves using an understanding of biological processes to interpret
the structure and composition of biological materials. Scien sts use the principles of relative
dating to determine the order in which things happened in Earth’s history, the patterns of fossil
appearance and disappearance found in successive layers of sedimentary rock to discover the
history of life and to correlate bodies of sedimentary rock separated by large distances, and
radiometric (absolute) dating to determine the age of a past Earth and Life events. Using these
approaches humanity has been able to discover how life developed through time.
In addition to the fossil record, the genes of living organisms provide important information
about the ming and nature of events in the history of life. For example, so-called molecular
clocks measure the time elapsed since species diverged using the rate at which gene c
diﬀerences appear. In this way, ages provided by molecular clocks represent the lengths of me
(numbers of generations) that species have been reproductively isolated from each other. As an
example, comparing human and ape DNA indicates that our last common ancestor lived ~7
Mya.
Humanity’s modern understanding of the nature of biological events results primarily from
studying the structure and composition of biological materials. The structure of biological
materials includes their shape and arrangement, which determines their function at all scales.
The composition of biological materials includes the molecules, elements, and isotopes that
comprise them and the relative abundances of characteris cs in populations and ecosystems.
By understanding the natural processes that form and modify biological materials, scien sts can
interpret the structure and composition of biological materials to understand the origins of
those materials. Table 4.6 provides important examples of what humanity can learn from
materials that record biological and climate events.
Table 4.6. What Biological Materials Records

4

How Organisms Change through Time

The properties of living and fossil organisms indicate that successive generations of a
population changes when individuals with beneﬁcial a ributes survive to reproduce more
commonly than their peers. Thus, diﬀeren al survival can cause successive generations of a
population to change. These changes include variations in the way genes are used. For
example, populations change when the duration or location of gene expression changes—
without any change to the genes being expressed.
In this way, signiﬁcant changes to bodies result from how genes are applied. Said another way,
many diﬀerences between organisms do not require new genes. Instead, the changes result
from diﬀerences in how the same genes are applied. For example, all organisms with bones
produce their skeletal elements using the same (homologous) genetic toolkit. In these
organisms, the diﬀerences in bone shape and size result from how bone-producing genes are
used—not from new genes.
Genetic mutations can also cause populations of organisms to change through time. These
mutations result from natural processes such as radiation, gene sharing, and faulty replication.
Although most mutations are detrimental and cause miscarriage or cancerous growth,
mutations can also produce beneﬁcial a ributes. Mutations that are passed to successive
generations cause populations to change through time.
A prominent example of a deleterious human mutation is the single-gene c-le er dele on that
broke the process that produces vitamin-C in primates. This damaging error was allowed to
persist in early primate populations because, at the me, the abundant vitamin C provided by
their fruity diets masked the genetic deﬁciency. By the time human ancestors le fruit-ﬁlled
forests for emerging vitamin-C-deﬁcient grasslands, the genetic machinery that makes vitamin
C was pervasively broken. In this same way, the eventually-deleterious mutations that lead to
loss of sight and pigmentation in cave-dwelling organisms are masked. Outside the cave, these
mutations are deleterious, but inside where there is no light sight and pigmentation do not
improve survival. Thus, eventually-damaging mutations can creep into populations during
periods when their eﬀects on reproduction are neutral.
Some beneﬁcial mutations involve the duplication of en re genes or sets of genes. Mutations

5 Some beneﬁcial mutations involve the duplication of en re genes or sets of genes. Mutations
of this type have produced important plants like those from which we harvest wheat, potatoes,
peanuts, and bananas. Duplications of this kind have also produced animals with repeated body
segments—like the replicated thorax segments of millipedes and snakes.
Interestingly, some mutations can be simultaneously beneﬁcial and detrimental. An example
involves the single-gene c-le er subs tution that produces sickle cell anemia in humans. This
mutation produces abnormally shaped red blood cells that have diminished capacity to carry
oxygen and enhanced ability to resist malaria. These sickle-shaped cells are life-threating to
individuals that only produce abnormal cells, but they are beneﬁcial to individuals that produce
both normal and abnormal cells. Unsurprisingly, this mutation persists in human populations
that have been constantly exposed to malaria.
In short, the traits of populations change through time when the relative abundance of genes in
populations shi . These shi s result from changes in how genes are used and from deleterious,
neutral, and beneﬁcial mutations. Signiﬁcantly, without the ability to change across generations
species would be unable to adapt to the constantly changing environments they inhabit, and
they would eventually go ex nct. Thus, the abundance and diversity of present Earth life is a
powerful witness to the reality of life’s ability to change through me, to evolve. Indeed, it is
this very process—adaptation across generations—that has produced the unity and diversity of
life.

Learning from Ötzi

Not only do observations of biological materials allow humanity to interpret broad-scale
patterns in the history of life, they also allow us to learn a great deal about speciﬁc individual
organisms. Ötzi the Iceman provides a fun example of the latter. Hikers found Ötzi in 1991 in
glacial ice of the Italian Alps near the Austrian border—as illustrated in Figure 4.18.

Figure 4.18. Top: Ötzi before he was removed from ice and the location of his discovery.
Bo om: Some of the clothing and weapons found with him. (Author illustration, images from
Wikimedia)

6

atter Ötzi’s discovery, oﬃcials carefully liberated his body and associated ar facts from the ice
and moved him to a University in Italy where these materials were studied with great intensity
by numerous scien sts from around the world. Table 4.7 lists what humanity has learned thus
far about Ötzi (organized by observation type), and Figure 4.19 shows a reconstruction of this
fascinating individual. Before proceeding, inves gate what what humanity has been able to
learn about Ötzi from biological remains and ar facts.
Table 4.7. What observations of Ötzi and associated ar facts have taught humanity.

Figure 4.19. Reconstruction of Ötzi the Iceman. (Wikimedia)

7

As you can see, the a ributes of biological materials allow humanity to discover the nature of
living and fossil organisms and to understand the development of life (illustrated in Figure 4.20).

Figure 4.20. Illustration of the history of Earth life. (Wikimedia)
As a last thought, recall that any true explanation of the development of Life must be consistent
with observations of biological and Earth materials—all of which are important records of God’s
creative works. If you ﬁnd that you react skep cally to scien ﬁc explanations of the history of
life, we invite you to consider what leads you to mistrust the natural scripture upon which
which these interpretations are founded.
