
4.3 Here Today, Gone Tomorrow … But Still Here!
How Bodies Con nuously Remake Themselves
Dr. Dan Moore and Dr. Alan Holyoak, Geology and Biology Departments, BYU-Idaho

Ignorance more frequently begets conﬁdence than does knowledge: it is those who know li le,
and not those who know much, who so positively assert that this or that [mechanis c] problem
will never be solved by science. —Charles Darwin

Learning Objectives:
● Understand and be able to iden fy each of the following: the stages or states of postnatal human
development—infancy, childhood, adolescence, adulthood, and old age; the basic nature of each
transition that separates these developmental stages; gene regulation, control genes, and gene c
mutations.
● Describe the role of gene regulation in the con nuous recreation of bodies, including in the
ini ation and termination of the postnatal states of human development.
● Describe how a cell knows when, where, and for how long to activate, enhance, repress, or
deactivate par cular genes.
● Explain how gene regulation can produce signiﬁcant diﬀerences between organisms like
chimpanzees and humans that share much of their DNA.

Our bodies are amazingly complex systems. Human adults consist of many trillions of cells—
thousands of mes more cells than the number of humans on Earth. What’s more, these cells
aren’t randomly arranged. Each is highly specialized and coordinates with its colleagues, near
and far. Most people think about humans on an organismal level, but few view their body as the
coordinated eﬀorts of trillions of individual organisms (cells). The view that bodies are colonies
of cooperating organisms is a profoundly insigh ul way to think about bodies—in part because
the key diﬀerence between single-celled and mul cellular organisms like you is the enhanced
ability of your cells to persistently perform speciﬁc tasks. This specialization begins before
you’re born and persists as your body con nuously recreates itself throughout your life.

Prenatal Human Development
Postnatal human development consists of the biological states known as infancy, childhood,
adolescence, adulthood, and old age—which are outlined in Table 4.8. It also includes the
transitions that separate these states. Postnatal development begins and ends with the
transitions known as birth and death. The ideal ming for birth results from trade-oﬀs that
maximize prenatal development and minimize death (from heads too large to pass through the
birth canal). Interestingly, wonderful as modern Cesarean delivery is, it has allowed female hips
in some human populations to evolve to smaller size—in a positive feedback that increases the

2
in some human populations to evolve to smaller size—in a positive feedback that increases the
need for C-section deliveries.
Table 4.8. States of postnatal human development

atter birth, infants remain poorly developed and are en rely dependent upon others. For
example, they can only see things that are about as far away as the face of someone holding
them. Fascinatingly, have you ever no ced that, without any training, you place your face in this
zone when you interact with infants—say, by trying to get them to smile?
Relative to adults, babies have huge, weakly developed skulls. The propor onal sizes of infant
body parts change as humans age, as illustrated in Figures 4.21. This kind of diﬀeren al growth
demonstrates the plas city of bodies. When the so-called control genes that orchestrate body
development misﬁre, anomalous growth occurs—producing individuals with atypical body sizes
or propor ons (Figure 4.21) or broken body parts or processes.

Figure 4.21. Le : Illustrations showing how development alters the relative sizes and shapes of
body parts, including skulls. Right: Photo of Robert Wadlow standing with his 6- -tall (1.8 m)
father. Robert was nearly 9 (2.7 m) tall, weighed almost 450 pounds (205 kg), and wore an 18-
inch-long (0.5 m) shoe. Sadly, this gentle giant died at age 22. (Author illustration, images from
Wikimedia)
During childhood, body propor ons, abili es, and activities become signiﬁcantly more
advanced and complex. Children learn to walk with conﬁdence, talk using complete sentences,
climb, feed themselves, properly dispose of bodily waste, and sotion. Children also develop the
ability to iden fy and respond to social cues and situations, develop their ﬁrst long-term
memories, and begin their formal education. In addition, they improve overall body
coordination and develop ﬁne motor skills. Childhood ends when puberty begins.

3

Puberty produces adolescent bodies capable of sexual reproduction. The physical, mental, and
emotional changes produced during puberty result from a hormonal cascade (of estrogen,
progesterone, and testosterone) ini ated by the release of a molecular signal (GnRH) from a
small por on of the brain (the hypothalmus). Pubescent changes in females include widening
the hips, enlarging the breasts, so ening the skin, growing pubic hair, and ini ating the
menstrual cycle. Changes in males include maturation of the testes, production of sperm,
growth of facial and pubic hair, deepening of the voice, and ini ation of bone and muscle
growth.
Adults have fully-mature bodies capable of successful reproduction. Even so, developmental
maturation con nues into adulthood. For example, fully mature brains capable of peak
coordination, emotional expression, reasoning, and action-consequence association typically
emerge in the mid-20s. Before then, adolescents can be awkward, uncoordinated, and struggle
to express emotion or an cipate the consequences of their actions.
Early adulthood (mid-20s to 40s) is prime- time for childbearing and career development. It is
also when adults are most likely to experience good health. Many people become less active in
middle adulthood (~40s to 60s). This behavioral change slows metabolism and causes those
that do not reduce calorie intake to gain weight. Weakening of vision (from hardening of the
lenses) is also common in middle adulthood. Later (~50), women experience the end of
reproductive ability (menopause). Then, as adults approach 60, skin begins to wrinkle and hair
begins to lose pigmentation or fall out.
Old age results from social and biological factors that cause the body and mind to weaken.
Social causes include lifestyles that become increasingly sedentary and leisurely. Table 4.3.1
lists important biological causes of aging, an area of ongoing research. Healthy lifestyles,
medications, and medical treatments can reduce the accumulation of age-related physiological
problems. Nevertheless, even healthy individuals with good access to medical care eventually
accumulate age-related problems. When accumulating problems lead to loss of important body
functions, death ensues.
Table 4.9. Prominent causes of aging.

4

Age at death among seniors varies greatly and is believed to result from inheritance,
environmental stresses, and lifestyle. While we cannot currently change our genetic code, we
can exercise, eat well, and minimize exposure to environmental risks. Together with Star Trek
Vulcans, we invite you to: “Live long and prosper!”

How Bodies Con nuously Recreate Themselves

As humans age, our bodies are con nuously recreated, as depicted in Figure 4.22. In fact,
nearly every por on of adult bodies are rebuilt every decade, as shown by Table 4.10. This
leads to an apparent paradox: it remains easy to recognize an adult friend following a decade or
more of separation, atter essen ally all the visible matter that comprise their body have been
replaced. The paradox resolves when we realize that it is the body pattern that we recognize as
‘them’, not the matter that comprises that pattern.

Figure 4.22. Conceptual image illustrating the transitory nature of body parts and bodies.
(Wikimedia)
Table 4.10. Lifespan of body parts

This remarkably consistent appearance of bodies masks their tremendous plas city, which
results from essen al life processes like those described in Table 4.11. These processes ensure
that, barring uncorrected errors, a body’s recognizable pattern is perpetually recreated. The
building and rebuilding of a body pattern is regulated by a special class of genes called control
genes.
Although most people understand that genes are instructions for building bodies, few people
understand the role of these special genes in governing and coordinating biological activi es
inside cells. Control genes accomplish this by causing other genes to turn on, ramp up, ramp
down, or turn oﬀ. Understanding the nature and functioning of control genes is essen al to
explaining how bodies form and persist. What’s more, abundant evidence suggest that bodies

5 explaining how bodies form and persist. What’s more, abundant evidence suggest that bodies
have formed this way throughout the history of Life, since the earliest living things emerged
from lawfully self-assembling inorganic systems by 3.4 Bya.
Table 4.11. Essen al life processes

Gene Regulation

Humanity ﬁrst discovered control genes several decades ago. This intensely important area of
active research has and will con nue to beneﬁt the human family. For example, understanding
gene regulation will allow humanity to regrow malformed, impaired, or damaged body parts.
This reality seems less remarkable when we recall that every cell in a body contains all the
instructions to make every part of that body. From this perspective, learning to repair or regrow
body parts involves learning the sequences of genetic instructions that build those parts—in
other words, learning where, when, for how long, and in what order to activate genes.
Gene regulation consists of all the genes, signals, processes, and feedbacks that orchestrate the
building and rebuilding of bodies. This regulatory system uses control genes and environmental
cues to activate, enhance, repress, and deactivate genes. To do their jobs correctly, all
specialized cells must activate par cular genes in speciﬁc sequences and deactivate other
genes. For example, imagine how quickly death would ensue if specialized cells like those in the
lung began performing another role, like producing bone.
The basic aspects of gene regulation are illustrated in Figure 4.23. The protein ‘keys’ in the
illustration modulate gene expression. In nature, many such keys act simultaneously to regulate
genes. O en, the concentration of these protein signals acts to enhance or repress gene
activation. In this way, specialized cells, ssues, organs, and bodies are ini ally built,
con nuously rebuilt, and transformed during developmental transitions—in a complexly
branching cascade of feedback-infused gene activation and deactivation. Indeed, gene
regulation is right now remaking your body and keeping you alive. (We invite you to take a few
moments to digest the important, italicized sentence above.)
As you can see, gene regulation is a profoundly important process. It guides the single cell from
which each body forms through an incredibly nuanced and complex developmental process
during gestation and then shepherds the con nuous recreation of each body throughout life.
As we’ll see, it also plays an essen al role in the adaptation of populations to their
environments and, as such, in the development of life on Earth—from the very ﬁrst single-

6 environments and, as such, in the development of life on Earth—from the very ﬁrst single-
celled organisms to those we observe today, including humans.

Figure 4.23. A highly simpliﬁed illustration showing how control-gene-produced protein keys
guide cells to express speciﬁc genetic instructions at par cular locations and mes, in a
complexly branching cascade of genetic events. In this way, control genes regulate the self-
assembly and con nuous reassembly of bodies. (Author illustration, images from Wikimedia)

Why are Organisms Diﬀerent?

Clearly, changing where, when, and how long speciﬁc genes are expressed changes the forms
and functions of body parts and bodies. Said another way, when expressed diﬀerently, iden cal
genes can produce body parts that diﬀer in size, shape, and function. Thus, gene regulation is
an important source of biological diversity. Earlier, we developed ativery basic understanding of
how genetic changes (mutations) and interactions between populations and their environments
(selective inheritance) can cause populations to change through time (to adapt, evolve). Now,
we can add gene regulation to this list.
To illustrate how the same genes can produce the bodies of diﬀerent species, we compare the
body forms and genetic compositions of bonobos, chimpanzees, and humans. As you can see in
Figure 4.24, chimp and bonobo bodies are nearly iden cal in both form and genetic makeup. In
contrast, humans have quite diﬀerent bodies despite their tremendous genetic similarity (~99%
iden cal) to chimps and bonobos.
This apparently incongruous relationship between body form and genetic composition is
resolved by this important truth: both genes and gene regulation cause diﬀerences in the
characteris cs of bodies. Thus, bonobo and chimp bodies are essen ally iden cal because they
have almost the exact same genes, and they use those genes in essen ally iden cal ways. In
contrast, human bodies are diﬀerent because, despite having essen ally the same genes, those
genes are used in diﬀerent ways. For example, human genes build larger heads with ﬂatter
faces, more complex brains, skin with ﬁner hair and more sweat glands, and skeletons that are
exquisitely-well-adapted to walking, running, and throwing.

7

As a result, most of the diﬀerences between human and chimp/bonobo bodies result from
diﬀerences in where, when, and for how long iden cal genes are activated—not from using
diﬀerent genes. Notably, the changes in gene application that enable some of the most
remarkable human a ributes simultaneously diminish our abilities in other areas. For example,
compared to bonobos and chimps, humans are weak and truly awful climbers.

Figure 4.24. Comparisons of body form (top) and genetic composition (bo om) of bonobos,
chimpanzees, and humans. Genes and gene regulation are nearly iden cal in chimpanzees and
bonobos. In contrast, although human genes are ~98.8% iden cal to bonobos and chimps,
human gene regulation is quite diﬀerent. The diﬀering a ributes of human bodies result from
these small genetic diﬀerences and signiﬁcant regulatory diﬀerences. (Author produced
illustration, bonobo/chimp image from National Geographic)
This incredibly important idea is a main reason why life is so diﬀerently the same. Take a
moment to let that sink in: many of the a ributes that make bodies diﬀerent result from
variations in how iden cal/homologous genes are used. Knowing this profound reality will allow
you to see through the surface diﬀerences that distinguish species to the shared genes and
genetic processes that unite them. In addition, this truth explains why humans share so many
(homologous) genes with organisms with such diﬀerent body forms. For example, our genes are
~85% iden cal to mice, ~60% iden cal to ﬂies, and ~20% iden cal to yeast.
Can you now see how variations in gene regulation produce most homologous features,
including the mammalian forelimbs in Figure 4.4? The vast variation in mammal limbs results

8 including the mammalian forelimbs in Figure 4.4? The vast variation in mammal limbs results
from diﬀerences in where, when, and how long the same (homologous) limb-building genes are
expressed in each organism. Of course, this remarkable reality extends beyond mammals and
limbs. Consider the ﬁsh body illustrated in Figure 4.25. It contains the same parts as your body
—brain, limbs, lungs, stomach, liver, eyes, gonads, and sotion. What’s more, these body parts all
built using the same (homologous) genes in humans and ﬁshes. This explains why the bodies of
lobe-ﬁn ﬁsh and human look so diﬀerent but share more than 70% of the same (homologous)
genes.

Figure 4.25. A lobe-ﬁn ﬁsh. (Wikimedia)
The following analogy may help you more deeply understand how gene regulation produces
rather diﬀerent-looking body parts using the same (homologous) genes. An orchestra can play
many diﬀerent symphonies using the same instruments, as the conductor guides diﬀerent sets
of instruments to play diﬀerent notes at-and-for diﬀerent mes. In the same way, control genes
can guide the same genes to build many diﬀerent-looking bodies by expressing genes in
diﬀerent locations at-and-for diﬀerent mes. As a result, diﬀerent bodies are built using many
of the same genes.
Incidentally, one of the barriers to understanding evolution for many people is the notion that
most diﬀerences between organisms require new genes. This notion is false. Instead, most
diﬀerences in body form and function result from small changes in the expression of the same
(homologous) genes. (We invite you to pause and ponder this important, italicized sentence.)

Figure 4.26. Illustration of a developing human. (Wikimedia)
To close, we return to our original topic, human postnatal development (Figure 4.26). So, what
controls the states and transitions that comprise the development of humans between birth
and death? You guessed it: gene regulation. Expressed using the orchestra analogy, a human

9
and death? You guessed it: gene regulation. Expressed using the orchestra analogy, a human
body is a beau ful symphony conducted by control genes and performed by genes. We invite
you to take a moment occasionally to enjoy and express gra tude for the music.
Earlier, we discovered that the order found in stars, galaxies, the Universe, and Earth results
from natural processes interacting in complex ways. Can you begin to see that the order found
in living things forms in the same way? Are you starting to see more clearly the stupendous
explanatory power of descendancy and adaptation in explaining the a ributes of living things?
Finally, can you see why the scriptural analogy of forming organisms by molding clay is such a
symbolically accurate way to express how lawful molding of bodies through time produced all
living things, ancient and modern?
