4.4 Self-Conducting Orchestras
How Bodies Self-Assemble
Dr. Dan Moore and Dr. Alan Holyoak, Geology and Biology Departments, BYU-Idaho

Imagine a house coming together spontaneously from all the information contained in the bricks:
that is how animal bodies are made. —Neil Shubin

Learning Objectives:
● Understand and be able to identify each of the following: stages or states of prenatal human
development—pre-embryo, embryo, and fetus; the basic nature of each transi on that separates
these developmental stages; body axes, body segments, and birth.
● Brieﬂy describe how each cell in a developing organism or body part knows what to do in each
moment—which genes to turn on or accentuate and which to inhibit or turn oﬀ. Speciﬁcally,
understand how body geography forms and how cells know where, when, and how to develop a
body part such as a limb or eye.
● Understand how even small changes to the application of control genes (gene regulation) can cause
signiﬁcant changes in the characteris cs of bodies. Also, describe how conﬁdent humanity should in
our understanding of the basic processes by which a single cell becomes a complex body.

If you found postnatal human development interesting, prenatal development will blow your
mind. Before birth, a single cell develops into a complexly organized infant made of billions of
specialized cells. If you’re one that struggles to understand how humans self-assembled from
single cells over a period of ~3.5 billion years, consider that adult human bodies self-assemble
in only ~25 years, and prenatal development occurs in just 9 months. From our perspective, it
seems strange to easily accept that human adult bodies can form lawfully from a single cell in
~25 years and then struggle to accept that human bodies can form lawfully from single cells in
~3.5 By. More on this later.
Scientific understanding of the development of individual organisms and of populations has
grown rapidly in the last half-century. This acceleration has beentifacilitated by important
discoveries that include breakthroughs in human understanding of genetics, embryology, and
cellular communication.

Bodies Consist of Communicating Cells

All living things communicate. For example, infec ous bacteria in your body produce toxins that
make you sick when the signals from their colleagues reach a par cular threshold. Although
single-celled organisms communicate in rela vely simple ways, cellular specialization can
emerge in bacterial colonies. In these colonies, specialized cells focus on speciﬁc tasks and rely

2
emerge in bacterial colonies. In these colonies, specialized cells focus on speciﬁc tasks and rely
on colleagues for other functions. In this way, bacterial colonies can be thought of as simple
transient bodies.
The key diﬀerence between simple and complex bodies is the degree and persistence of cell
specialization. For example, most cells in the adult bodies of humans and trees are so
specialized that they die when separated from their colleagues. Interestingly, animals like
sponges bridge the gap between simple and complex. Sponges clearly have bodies, but
separated cells can also exist solo. What’s more, isolated cells can reassemble new bodies, as
illustrated in Figure 4.27.

Figure 4.27. Illustration showing how simple animals can exist as bodies or as single cells.
Specialized cells in sponge bodies perform speciﬁc tasks like moving water, capturing food, and
reproducing. When disassembled, these cells can exist alone, but they can also form new
bodies. (Author illustration, images from Wikimedia)
Importantly, the degree and persistence of cell specialization correlates directly with the
complexity of cellular communication. Cells in simple organisms interact in uncomplicated ways,
but the highly specialized cells that form complex bodies display intricately dependent
communication and coordination. Even so, all cells communicate using signal molecules
produced by genes.
To coordinate behavior, cells must communicate location, ming, and instructions. Individual
and overlapping concentration gradients of signal molecules typically identify the location of
each cell, and changing concentrations of signal molecules generally establishes ming. What’s
more, the very molecules that communicate location and ming also ac vate and deac vate
genes—in the cascading progression of instructions that build and rebuild complex bodies like
yours.
Thus, signal molecules provide all the information each cell needs. They communication to each
cell where it is, what to do, and when to do it. In these ways, cellular communication generates
the coordination by which simple and complex bodies self-assemble.

Prenatal Human Development

Successfully producing a healthy infant requires near-perfect coordination of numerous
intricate ac vi es. The orchestration of this complex symphony is based on the simple process
that you already understand—the straigh orward ac vation and repression of genes. In this

3
that you already understand—the straigh orward ac vation and repression of genes. In this
way, control genes guide the development of humans as they pass through each stage and
transi on of prenatal development—pre-embryo, embryo, and fetus (Figure 4.27).

Figure 4.28. Illustration showing the nature and ming of the major stages of prenatal human
development. (Author illustration, images from Wikimedia)
Human development begins at fertilization, when sperm and egg unite. The journey made by
sperm is epic. To illustrate, let’s imagine the journey as an Olympic swim event. Before the
gunshot (ejaculation), a billion swimmers line up at the downstream end of a 50-mile-long river.
When the trigger is pulled, the swimmers dive in and race upstream towards the egg.
Immediately, a third of the par cipants drown, because they can’t swim. What’s more, most
remaining swimmers take the wrong path, stop when they confuse river-side for river-end, or
die when they run out of energy.
Amazingly, only a few hundred swimmers make it to the egg at the end of the 50-mile river, and
they make that journey in just 30 minutes! However, arriving at the egg is not the end of the
race, for upon arrival the swimmers discover that two locked cages protect the prize.
Undaunted, the winner-sperm kicks the ﬁrst cage open and uses a chemical key (enzyme) to
enter the second. Immediately a er this sperm enters, the egg builds a barrier that remaining
sperm cannot penetrate. It’s a pre y incredible race, right?! So, the next time you’re feeling
down, remember how special you are. A part of what made your body won a billion-swimmer
race. Go you!
From a mother’s perspective, the pregnancy that follows fertilization divides into three
trimesters that each last ~3 months. The ﬁrst trimester consists mostly of the pre-embryo and
embryo stages, and the fetus stage comprises the second and third trimesters.

4
fertilization ini ates the pre-embryo stage. In this stage cells divide, the body axes that deﬁne
body geography emerge, and cells begin ﬁlling specialized functions (diﬀeren ating). Ini al
divisions produce a solid ball of iden cal cells (morula), each capable of performing all cell
functions. At this time, chemical cues allow surface cells to identify their posi on. These cues
establish the ﬁrst bit of body geography (inside-outside) and cause the solid ball to form a cell
mass inside a ﬂuid-ﬁlled ball. The ball will become the amnio c sac and related structures, and
the internal cell mass will become a human body.
Although simple, the transi on from solid to ﬂuid-ﬁlled ball illustrates how molecules ‘tell’ cells
where they are located, what to do, and when to do it. As timen oned, the same molecular
signals that indicate location and ming can also ac vate and deac vate the genetic
instructions that carry out the next developmental step. What’s more, each step produces
chemical signals that ini ate the next step—in the interactive cascade of gene expression that
builds a body. As you can see, at its core the formation of complex bodies is a beau fully
simple, eﬃcient process.
Around week 2, the inner cell mass undergoes the developmental transi on (gastrulation) that
ini ates the embryo stage. During this important transi on, the cell mass becomes three layers
of ssue—an innermost layer (endoderm) that become the diges ve tract and associated
organs; an outermost layer (ectoderm) that produce the skin, nervous system, and elements of
the skeleton; and a middle layer (mesoderm) that generates pre y much everything else. If
uncorrected errors occur during this transi on, the embryo spontaneously miscarries. Up to
20% of pregnancies end in this way, o en without the mother even aware she was pregnant.
During the embryo stage, the placenta grows, organs form in the ssue layers, and the growing
embryo begins receiving nourishment through the placenta (Figure 4.28). This nourishment
involves oxygen, dissolved nutrients, and other molecules moving from mother to embryo
across a thin placental timembrane. In this way, alcohol or other harmful substances in the
mothers body can move into the embryo and disrupt normal development. Of course,
molecules also cross the timembrane from embryo to mother. In fact, ‘morning sickness’ par ally
results from molecules that move from child to mother.
In embryos, ac vated cascades of control genes ﬁnish establishing the main body axes—head
to tail (anterior-posterior), back to belly (dorsal-ventral), and center to edge (medial-lateral).
These signals also produce the body’s main segments (head, thorax, and abdomen) and
subsegments. These subsegments develop where a segment-promoting signal released near
the tail overlaps with and exceeds a segment-inhibiting signal released near the head.
Elongation of the developing body causes this area of overlap to move tail-ward, forming new
subsegments along the way. In addi on to forming subsegments, the body begins forming
internal organs during this stage—beginning with the heart, diges ve tract, spine, and brain.
In this way, rela ve concentrations of signal molecules indicate to cells in developing bodies
exactly where they are located, what they must do, and when to do it. Note that there is no
agent or central cell that directs body construction. Instead, independent cells responding to

5
agent or central cell that directs body construction. Instead, independent cells responding to
chemical signals produce body parts by lawful self-assembly—in a cascading instruction tree of
chemical signals ac vated and deac vated by control genes.
Profoundly, the body parts of all organisms form in this way, producing much of the ‘unity of
life’. Moreover, variations in the location and ming of regulatory signals account for variations
in the size and shape of homologous body parts, in populations and across species. For
example, the same processes that build diﬀerent sizes of human legs and necks build very short
frog legs and necks and very long giraﬀe legs and necks.
Around week 9, once all organs have begun developing, the embryo becomes a fetus. During
the fetus stage, functioning organs and organ systems prepare for life outside the uterus,
growth accelerates, and the fetus begins to look like a miniature human (Figure 4.28). Ideally,
birth occurs when the fetus is fully developed.
Truly, the processes that produce an infant from the fusion of egg and sperm represent a
beau fully ﬁnely tuned biochemical symphony orchestrated by control genes. The signal
molecule oxytocin provides a heart-warming example of the intricately interrelated nature of
these developmental systems. Beau fully, oxytocin not only moves the fetus from a nurturing
uterus into a cold hard world but simultaneously provides the helpless infant with a loving
bonded caretaker. So cool!

Do Control Genes Really Regulate the Formation of Bodies?

Thus far, we’ve asserted that bodies form and continuously reform as control genes trigger the
expression of other genes in a cascading symphony of cellular specialization and focused
implementation. Like all scientific ideas, this explanation makes predictions that allow humanity
to test its validity. For example, if this explanation is true, control genes should produce
chemical signals that establish the geography of bodies and guide the development of body
parts. Moreover, if true, humanity should be able to use this knowledge to manipulate the
formation of bodies and body parts.
Fruit ﬂies provide useful ways to test many biological explanations because they are proliﬁc
reproducers and live short lives. Figure 4.29 shows the normal development of fruit ﬂies and
illustrates the relationship between control genes and the development of body geography,
segments, and parts.
Interestingly, control genes in mother ﬂies establish body axes for oﬀspring by expressing signal
proteins at each end of the eggs later fertilized by father ﬂies—as shown by the glowing
molecules in the upper-right image of Figure 4.29. As eggs divide, the front-to-back and center-
to-edge variations in the concentrations of the head-signaling (red) and tail-signaling (green)
proteins indicate the location of each cell and set the stage for establishing the ﬁner-scale
directionality of each body segment. As timen oned, developing human bodies use similar
chemical signals to establish body geography.

6
Of course, the very molecules that establish body axes and segments also indicate what cells
should do at each moment. For example, signal molecules provide the locations, ming, and
instructions for building each component of each body segment—step by beau ful step, with
each ini ated event providing the chemical cues for successive event cascades.

Figure 4.29. Le : Normal development of fruit ﬂies (Drosophila timelanogaster). Upper-right:
Illustrations showing the development of body geography and segments (le ) and photos
showing the associated chemical signals (glowing proteins, right). Bo om: Illustrations
correlating the control genes that determine body segments in adult and embryo. (Author
illustration, images from Wikimedia)
This ‘branching’ nature of body development makes it easy to make huge changes in a
developing body by altering instruction cascades at rela vely high levels. For example, it is
straigh orward to build eyes at essen ally any location on a body by inserting a single signal—
the ‘build eye here’ signal—at that location during development. Figure 4.30 shows this and
other examples of humanity’s ability to understand and control body development. Take a few
moments to study this important ﬁgure.

7

Figure 4.30. Photos of adult ﬂies in which researchers have manipulated body development.
Le -most Photo: Eyes placed on antennae, legs, and back by inserting the ‘build eye here’
signal at those locations. Second Photo: Fly with normal eyes facing a ﬂy with no eyes. Eye
formation turned oﬀ by removing the ‘build eye here’ signal. Third Photo: Fly with legs where
antennae should be. This body formed a er replacing the ‘build antenna here’ signal with the
‘build leg here’ signal. Last Photo: Fly with two thorax segments. This body formed a er
inserting the ‘build thorax here’ signal into adjacent body segments. (Author illustration, images
from Wikimedia)
Limb development in chickens provides another interesting example of how the protein signals
produced by control genes build body parts and bodies. Following expression of the ‘build limb
here’ signal, control genes produce signals that establish limb geography and, as the instruction
cascade proceeds, construct each part of the developing limb. Figure 4.31 illustrates what
happens when the ‘build the back side of the limb here’ signal (shown in red) is moved to the
front side of a developing limb. Unsurprisingly, the resulting limb forms a mirror image, with
two ‘backsides’. Signiﬁcantly, this same kit of control genes build the limbs of all organisms with
bony limbs, including yours. Of course, this is the genetic reason why these limbs are
homologous (Figure 4.4).

Figure 4.31. Illustration showing normal (top) and manipulated (bo om) development of
chickentiforelimbs (wings). In the manipulated limb, the back side was built twice, by duplicating
the signal (red) that builds that por on of the limb. (Author illustration, images from
Wikimedia)
To be clear, these changes in body form resulted from altering individual signals—making it

8 To be clear, these changes in body form resulted from altering individual signals—making it
clear that rela vely simple variations in the application of control genes can produce
spectacular changes in body form, without the need for new genes. This incredible truth
explains much of the history and diversity of life. It also explains why humans share such high
percentages of genes with all living things. In addi on, it explains why the same (homologous)
control genes turn on the corresponding segments and body parts of organisms—as illustrated
in Figure 4.32.

Figure 4.32. Illustration showing how the same (homologous) control genes establish
corresponding body segments in simple and complex animals. This pa ern extends across all
organisms. For example, your body shares hundreds of control genes with yeast, a single-celled
eukaryote. (Author illustration, images from Wikimedia)
Can you now see more clearly how seemingly huge changes in body shape can result from
rela vely simple modiﬁcations of high-level control genes? For example, can you see how
millipedes could develop from an ancestor with fewer body segments, how early snakes
developed from lizard ancestors, how dolphins resulted from a land-dwelling mammal, and so
on? Unsurprisingly, these and so many similar reali es are established in ‘the mouths of
mul ple natural witnesses’—chief among them genetics, embryology, and the fossil record.
Most people are astounded when ﬁrst exposed to the lawful nature of body development. In
addi on, it can be surprising to consider how small changes in gene regulation can signiﬁcantly
alter the size, shape, and function of body parts and bodies. Moreover, it is exciting to
contemplate the numerous ways this knowledge will bless humanity—for example, by allowing
us to repair or rebuild malformed or damaged body parts.
At the beginning of this chapter we introduced the symmetrical character of human body
development illustrated in Figure 4.33. The upper half of the diagram shows the development
of an adult human body from a single cell in ~25 years. Essen ally everyone acknowledges that
this process is lawful. The remainder of this book explores the lawful nature of the bo om half
of this diagram—ﬁrst by exploring the natural processes that produce new species from existing
species, and then by exploring the stages and transi ons that produced modern humans from
Earth’s ﬁrst cells.

9

Figure 4.33. Illustration showing the lawful development of human bodies—via gene regulation
over ~25 y and via lawful body molding over ~3.5 By. (Author illustration, images from
Wikimedia)

