4.5 Nurturing Nature
Evolution as Observation and Theory
Dr. Dan Moore and Dr. Alan Holyoak, Geology and Biology Departments, BYU-Idaho

Nothing in biology makes sense except in the light of evolution. —Theodosius Dobzhansky

Learning Objectives:
● Understand and be able to identify each of the following: genes, biological evolution, population,
species, microevolution, macroevolution, extinction, ar ﬁcial and natural selection, population
isolation, speciation, and the theory of evolution.
● Explain evolution as observation and theory, using the terms listed above.
● Explain how microevolution can produce macroevolution, using the terms listed above.

Before humanity learned to use ‘things as they are’ as the arbiter of truth about the physical
world, the western world believed in ‘special creation’. This no on asserts that in the recent
past God directly created every type of organism as separate, perfect, unchanging, and
unchangeable en es. Although many aspects of this no on seemed to match wri en
scripture, the idea directly contradicts natural scripture. Instead of the a ributes predicted by
special creation, living en es are related, imperfect, and ever-changing. In the late 1700s,
Georges Cuvier made the ﬁrst of numerous observations that falsify special creation by
demonstrating the reality of extinction, the termination of en re groups of organisms.
Unfortunately, more than a century passed before humanity discovered an explanation for the
nature and development of living things capable of explaining life ‘as it is’. This revolution
resulted from a fusion of key discoveries. These included Charles Darwin’s ~1860 hypothesis of
evolution by natural selection, the ~1900 rediscovery of Gregor timendel’s work on inheritance,
the early 1950s discovery of DNA as the molecular basis for inheritance, the establishment of
the principles of ecology by the 1970s, and the ~1980s iden ﬁcation of the timechanisms by
which gene regulation builds and rebuilds bodies.
With the fusion of Darwin and timendel’s hypotheses in the early 1900s, humanity began in
earnest to explore whether evolution could explain the a ributes of living things. Since that
me, a network of discoveries has provided abundant and powerful tests of biological
evolution. What’s more, the vigorous opposi on of religious fundamentalists has intensiﬁed
scru ny of the scientific theory of evolution. As a result, the theory of evolution has been
exposed to more strenuous and intensive testing than nearly any other scientific theory.
Signiﬁcantly, the theory of evolution has withstood and been strengthened by this testing.
Today, those who consider that truth is ‘knowledge of things as they were, are, and will be’

2 Today, those who consider that truth is ‘knowledge of things as they were, are, and will be’
acknowledge that the theory of evolution stands alone as humanity’s most successful tool for
explaining the nature and development of life. Sadly, there is much confusion regarding the ‘e’
word (evolution). For example, rela vely few people can accurately deﬁne biological evolution.

What Is Evolution?

Biological evolution, which we’ll simply call evolution, refers to changes in the rela ve
abundance of characteris cs in a population or species from generation to generation. As you
know, these changing characteris cs are coded for by genes (alleles), the basic units of heredity.
So, evolution results when the propor on of genes (alleles) changes across generations. For our
purposes, a population is a group of interbreeding organisms that live in the same place at the
same time, and a species is a population that produces fer le oﬀspring. Even so, there is no
deﬁni on of species that applies well in every situation, in part because the diﬀerences
between ‘species’ is o en more gradational than discrete.
Thus, evolution occurs when successive generations of interbreeding organisms change in any
way—as when coloration or size changes in descendant populations. Large-scale evolutionary
changes o en occur when a population splits and the isolated groups change suﬃciently that
inter-group breeding becomes impossible. This forms two species from one. In these ways,
evolution occurs both within and between species.
Microevolution refers to evolution within a species, and macroevolution describes evolution
between species. Macroevolution involves changes in the rela ve propor ons of species over
rela vely long periods and includes the formation and extinction of species. Microevolution is
observational, and macroevolution is a scientific explanation that is consistent with numerous
observations. The theory of evolution encompasses both microevolution and macroevolution.
Thus, the theory of evolution is the extensively tested scientific explanation that describes how
the hereditable characteris cs of populations change through time, including how new species
arise and existing species become extinct. The theory of evolution explains that the unity of life
results from descendancy and the diversity of life results from adaptation. It further explains
that accrued microevolutionary changes generate the adaptations that produce
macroevolutionary change—as in the formation of new species.

Microevolution

Microevolution involves rela vely small, generation-to-generation shi s in characteris cs
within a species, usually over short periods. Selection is the process by which traits that
enhance survival and reproduction become more common in successive generations of a
population. Thus, microevolution occurs when natural or ar ﬁcial factors cause selection. It also
results from genetic innovation or dri , which we’ll explore later.
Ar ﬁcial selection occurs when humans breed organisms like cows and corn for speciﬁc traits,
like larger size. Similarly, natural selection occurs when environmental factors like climate

3
like larger size. Similarly, natural selection occurs when environmental factors like climate
change select for or against speciﬁc traits. No matter its source, selection acts on variability in
existing traits, does not require genetic innovation, and is an important cause of evolution.
Examples of ar ﬁcial selection abound. Figure 4.34 shows the microevolutionary eﬀects of
human breeding on maize and wolves. Humans began domes cating the grass plant teosinte by
~9 kya in highlands southwest of timexico City. A teosinte ‘ear’ is about as long as your ﬁnger and
has less than a dozen diﬃcult-to-digest kernels. In contrast, modern corn/maize has a 12-inch
ear with hundreds of easily digestable kernels. Like maize, human selection of wolf a ributes
has produced tremendous variabity. Modern dogs are so diverse that they stretch the biological
species concept described above. For example, natural mating between a 3-foot-tall (1 m) Great
Dane and a 6-inch-tall (15 cm) Chihuauhua is almost impossible. Wolf domes cation began in
Siberia no later than ~15 kya.

Figure 4.34. Examples of microevolution by ar ﬁcial selection in maize and wolf. As you can
see, humans selected variants of corn that produced more food, and ar ﬁcial selections have
produced tremendous variability in modern dogs. (Author illustration, images from Wikimedia)
All populations display examples of microevolutionary change resulting from natural selection,
as illustrated in Figure 4.35. A simple example involves the change in beak size in a population
of seed-eating birds (Medium Ground Finches on the island of Daphne Major in the Galapagos
Islands) before and a er the drought of 1976-1978. During the drought, researchers observed
that plants with larger seeds became more abundant than those with smaller seeds (Figure
4.35). As the availability of smaller seeds dropped, smaller-beaked birds in the population
struggled to survive and reproduce. As a result, the drought caused beak size in the population
to increase. Can you see how natural selection produces microevolution?
Like ﬁnch beak size during a drought, the propor on of light- and dark-colored Pepper Moths in
the Bri sh Isles changed when pollution altered individual ability to hide from natural
predators. Before the industrial revolution of the late 1700s, light-colored moths comprised
~99% of the local moth population because birds easily spo ed and ate dark-colored variants.
As industrial ac vi es covered trees in soot, dark-colored moths were favored. By 1959, dark-
colored moths comprised ~90% of the population. Then, a er environmental reforms in the
1970s allowed trees to once again achieve their natural color, light-colored individuals once
again rose to dominate the population. Thus, changing environmental condi ons selected body
color in the moths and pushed the population ﬁrst one way and then back.

4

Figure 4.35. Examples of microevolution resulting from natural selection in Galapagos Finches,
Bri sh Pepper Moths, and American Lampsilis mussels. (Author illustration; ﬁnch plot from
Charles Mallory, U. of Miami; moth images from IUPUI Biology; and mussel image from
USFWS)
As a third example, microevolution in the freshwater Limpsilis mussel has molded the
peripheral ssue into a ‘ﬁsh lure’. Note that what appears in Figure 4.35 to be a small ﬁsh, a
favorite prey of bass, is a disguised extension of mussel ﬂesh that enhances mussel
reproduction. If these mussels release their young directly into the rivers they inhabit, the
larvae are washed out to sea, and the population would eventually die out. Instead, numerous
generations of mussels have selected for individuals with ﬂeshy extensions that mimic bass
food. Then, when a bass strikes, the mussel blasts a pulse of larvae directly into its mouth—
where the larvae clamp onto whatever bit of bass they ﬁrst touch. Then, once developing
mussels reach suﬃcient size, they release from the bass, ﬂoat to the river bo om, and begin
living the ﬁlter-feeding lifestyle of adult mussels.
As you can see, many examples of microevolution are observed scientific facts, and other
examples involve scientific interpretation. Signiﬁcantly, microevolution produces the ‘lawful
body molding’ that ensures that populations remain ﬁnely-tuned to their environments.
Without microevolution, constantly changing environments species would go extinct. What’s
more, microevolutionary adaptations produced many of the larger-scale macroevolutionary
changes that characterize the history of Earth life and generated the diversity of life observed
today. So beau ful, so cool, and so well-described by the scriptural analogy of forming
organisms by molding clay!

Macroevolution

In contrast to microevolution, macroevolution refers to larger-scale changes between species
over longer periods. Macroevolution occurs when the rela ve propor on of interacting species
changes. These changes include rela vely small variations, such as when decreasing numbers of
wolves increase deer abundance. They also include large changes to the composi on of an
ecosystem, such as the rise and demise of species. Speciation is the origin of a new population
of organisms with characteris cs that are persistently dis nct from other populations.
Microevolution over long periods of time can produce new species.
Macroevolution is more challenging to directly observe than microevolution because it typically

5 Macroevolution is more challenging to directly observe than microevolution because it typically
occurs over periods that extend far beyond human lifespans. As a result, macroevolutionary
explanations involve more interpre on. Even so, some speciation events can be directly
observed.
For example, plants can form new species from one generation to the next—by duplicating
chromosomes during sex cell formation (polyploidy) or by combining genomes from dis nct
species (hybridization). In the laboratory, researchers have formed new species like the
‘radicole’ (raddish + cabbage) in this way. What’s more, genetic studies indicate that ~80% of
modern plant species formed in these ways—including many food plants like oats, co on,
potatoes, wheat, and bananas. Humanity can also directly observe speciation in single-celled
organisms like bacteria and short-lived animals like fruit ﬂies.
In addi on to directly observing speciation, humanity has used an overwhelming body of
empirical observations to test the validity of macroevolutionary interpretations like the
emergence of new species from an existing species. To date, these observations are unable to
falsify the theory of evolution, which indicates that the theory contains abundant truth.
Observations of macroevolution include data from genetic, embryological, ecological, and fossil
sources.
Most commonly, speciation involves the reproductive isolation of subpopulations. Such
isolation can result from the formation of geographic barriers like a mountain range or sand sea.
No matter the source, isolating timechanisms divide ini ally-interbreeding population. Once
split, genetic innovation and microevolutionary adaptations to dis nct environments can
produce populations that no longer interbreed. When this occurs, the new populations
represent dis nct species. As a result, the theory of evolution predicts that humanity should
observe populations at varying stages of reproductive isolation, from par al to complete
speciation.
Natural examples of par al speciation are abundant. For example, Mallards and Gadwall
represent persistently dis nct populations of ducks. However, these ducks can breed, and their
oﬀspring (Brewer’s ducks) are fer le. As such, these duck populations represent a small degree
of species separation. In contrast, horses and donkeys illustrate greater species separation.
When these populations breed they produce mules, which are infer le.
Similarly, examples of gradational speciation provide compelling examples of populations
‘caught in the act’ of forming new species through evolution. This kind of ‘in process’ speciation
occurs when a chain of reproducing populations have end-member groups that cannot
reproduce. Figure 4.36 shows three examples of these so-called ‘ring species’—in populations
of birds and salamanders. To be clear, the populations on the ‘closed’ por on of each ‘ring’
represent a single species, but the populations that lie at the ‘open’ por on of each ring are
separate species.
Ring species typically develop as the ranges of interbreeding populations expand around a
geographical barrier over many generations. During expansion, isolated populations change.

6 geographical barrier over many generations. During expansion, isolated populations change.
For example, exposure to diﬀerent selection pressures molds bodies in diﬀerent ways. This
eventually produces populations that, although adjacent, cannot interbreed and are thus
separate species. In this way, ring species allow humanity to observe in space (geography) the
descendancy relationships and microevolution that occurred through time, as populations
spread around a barrier. These and other ring species are profoundly powerful conﬁrmations of
the reality of micro and macroevolution.

Figure 4.36. Illustration showing groups of interbreeding populations whose end-members
cannot reproduce. The green ‘not allowed’ symbol lies between the populations that cannot
reproduce and are thus separate species. The geographic barriers in these examples are,
respectively, the Himalayas, Arc c Ocean, and Central Valley of California. (Author illustration,
images adapted from Wikimedia)
Notably, every modern species is part of a speciation story. As a result, examples of speciation
are nearly innumerable and include both modern and fossil organisms. Some examples are
based en rely on modern observations and others include fossil organisms. Figure 4.37
illustrates the nearly-complete speciation of Grand Canyon squirrels and the complete
speciation of Central American Porkﬁsh.

Figure 4.37. Illustrations showing speciation in Grand Canyon squirrels and Central American
Porkﬁsh. (Author illustration and Grand Canyon photo, other images adapted from Wikimedia).
In the area of the Grand Canyon, climate warming at the end of the last glacial period isolated
stands of Ponderosa Pine on the cooler, we er North Rim and on the warmer, drier South Rim.
Climate diﬀerences between these isolated forests caused ationce-interbreeding population of

7
Climate diﬀerences between these isolated forests caused ationce-interbreeding population of
squirrels to diverge down separate microevolutionary paths. Today, the speciation of North and
South Rim squirrels is nearly complete.
Geographic isolation also produced diverging populations of Porkﬁsh, a er being isolated by
the formation of Central America ~3.5 Mya. Today, Paciﬁc and Carribean Porkﬁsh are
completely separate species. Of course, this explanation is testable—for the timesoamerican
land bridge predicts the isolation of many marine species and the mixing of many terrestrial
species. Observations conﬁrm both sets of predictions.
In addi on to modern examples, the a ributes of fossil organisms through time mark clear
descendancy paths from early to modern organisms (see Figure 4.14). Researchers illustrate
both ﬁne- and broad-scale descendancy relationships in diagrams called phylogenetic trees.
Figure 4.38 shows two broad-scale examples of such descendancy trees. One illustrates major
transi ons in the development of modern whales, dolphins, and hippopotamus from a lineage
of early terrestrial mammals. The other illustrates the lawful body molding that produced
dinosaurs, including the modern ﬂying dinosaurs known as birds.

Figure 4.38. Illustrations of descendancy relationships and emerging a ributes among fossil
and modern groups of aqua c mammals (le ) and dinosaurs (right). Note that most major
groups of aqua c mammals and all ﬂightless dinosaurs are now extinct. (Illustrations adapted
from UCMP, Berkeley)
Both descendancy diagrams identify a ributes that mark developmental transi ons. The
emergence of novel a ributes such as these can be a stumbling block for individuals who know

8
emergence of novel a ributes such as these can be a stumbling block for individuals who know
li le about evolution. O en, these individuals assume that evolution asserts that these
emerging a ributes ‘appear out of nowhere’. Evolution suggests no such thing. Instead, the
theory of evolution recognizes that these ‘new’ a ributes are molded versions of preexisting
features.
What’s more, evolutionary relationships based on fossil observations are independently
established by abundant addi onal natural witnesses, including observations from genetics and
embryology. For example, did you know that the nostril in dolphin embryos forms at the front
of the face and then migrates to the top of the head before birth? Or that dolphin embryos
form hind limbs that then usually resorb before birth? Or that birds have inactive fossil genes
for building teeth but lack the control gene to turn them on? Or so many, many, many other
witnesses of the descendancy relationships that produced modern organisms. Signiﬁcantly,
descendancy trees such as these, together with similar supporting evidence, exist for all living
organisms—including humans.

At its core, the theory of evolution explains that the development and nature of living things
results from descent with adaptation through time. This asser on is supported by an extensive
web of biological and other observations. Said diﬀerently, numerous interrelated observations
of living things fail to falsify the theory of evolution. For this reason, biological evolution is not a
whimsical idea about what might or could happen. Instead, it provides humanity with
‘knowledge of life as it is, as it was, and as it will be’. Today, the theory of evolution informs and
provides the unifying principle for all ﬁelds of biology—genetics, timedicine, ecology,
embryology, and so on.
As a result, it’s diﬃcult to understand the timeaning of individuals who declare that they don’t
believe in or accept evolution. In our experience these individuals typically don’t timean that
they are opposed to observed microevolution, extinction, and speciation; or that they reject the
relatedness of all living things; or that they don’t believe in the principles of genetics, ecology,
or timedicine; or that they don’t accept the lawful nature of embryological development; or ….
Instead, as we’ve timen oned in other contexts, our experience indicates that individuals who
proclaim opposi on to evolution aren’t typically trying to say anything at all about evolution.
Instead, they are trying to assert that God created all living things. We agree with their
asser on, and we witness that life developed according to natural evolutionary processes.
To be clear, our timessage is not, “You’re a bozo if you don’t acknowledge the abundant truth
contained in the theory of evolution.” Instead, we are trying to impress upon the consistency of
evolutionary explanations with the explanations derived from wri en scripture. What’s more,
we are trying to help you understand the implications of disavowing the tremendous
explanatory power of this scientific theory. Rejecting the theory of evolution requires also
disavowing most scientific knowledge because this theory is one of humanity’s most extensively
tested scientific explanations. Whatever your present perspective, we wish you our very best as
you continue your personal search for truth. May you continue to enjoy and be abundantly
blessed in that pursuit.

