4.6 One Fish, Two Fish, Red Fish, Blue Fish 
How New Species Arise from Existing Species
Dr. Dan Moore and Dr. Alan Holyoak, Geology and Biology Departments, BYU-Idaho

There is grandeur in this view of life … that … from so simple a beginning endless forms most
beau ful and most wonderful have been and are being evolved. —Charles Darwin
Learning Objectives:
● Describe the nature of ‘lawful body molding’; that is, how evolution results from genetic innovation,
development, selection, and inheritance.
● Identify observations that fail to falsify the theory of evolution. Also, describe how the theory of
evolution fulﬁlls the functions of a scientific theory.
● Describe how conﬁdent humanity should be that the theory of evolution contains abundant truth.

Some times biological evolution gets a bad rap—o en because people have used the scientific
theory of evolution to promote non-scientific agendas. These misapplications have ‘muddied
the water’ and made it diﬃcult for laypeople to understand what evolution is and what it is not.
Having already described what evolution is, let’s explain what it is not. Biological evolution is
not atheism, nihilism, social Darwinism, or any other non-scientific belief.
Scientific fundamentalists o en use nonscientific interpretations of evolution as a club with
which to bludgeon religion. Sadly, the reverse is also true—for religious fundamentalists o en
use par cular interpretations of wri en scripture to wage war on science. All such errors result
from misusing the tools of truth, discovered or revealed. For example, recall that science can
only make authorita ve asser ons regarding the nature of the physical world. Of course,
science can appropriately inform other areas of human inquiry, but it cannot determine truth in
areas that require judgments of aesthe cs, ethics, poli cs, or spirituality.
As a result, science can provide only weak constraints regarding the existence of God (which
atheism addresses) or the objective reality of moral truth and the purpose of life (which nihilism
addresses). What’s more, scientific constraints strongly oppose the inherently racist and
supremacist no ons upheld by proponents of social Darwinism. As such, a empts to use
scientific theories or observations to promote no ons such as these are deeply ﬂawed and
represent the unacceptable misuse of science.
In contrast to these no ons, the scientific theory of evolution—which is an explanation of the
a ributes and development of living things—is appropriately and ﬁrmly founded in
observations of nature ‘as it has been, is, and will be’. These observations illuminate the core
evolutionary timechanisms that ‘lawfully mold’ the bodies of organisms across generations.

2
evolutionary timechanisms that ‘lawfully mold’ the bodies of organisms across generations.
Furthermore, these observations and processes help us understand the origin of human bodies.

Evolution as Lawful Body Molding 
Signiﬁcant genetic innovation causes populations to evolve. Such innovation can occur through
variability in gene regulation, genetic mutations like duplication errors, or genetic dri . genetic
dri results from non-selective events that alter the propor on of genes in populations—as
when a generation of gray and brown mice produce, by chance, a generation of only-gray mice
that lack the genes to build brown coloration. No matter their source, genetic changes can
aﬀect the development of bodies in subsequent generations.
As these oﬀspring develop, ecological interactions with their changing environment selects for
or against par cular a ributes, by enhancing or inhibiting the inheritance of those traits. Then,
as populations persist from generation to generation, natural timechanisms such as geographic
barriers can isolate subpopulations, allowing each to change down separate microevolutionary
paths. Over time, such microevolutionary changes can accrue to produce macroevolutionary
changes like the generation of new species.
This simple, high-level descrip on of evolution is illustrated in Figure 4.39. This graphic shows
how interactions between aspects of genetic innovation, development, selection, and isolation
can produce changes in the body forms of populations through time—a process we refer to as
lawful body molding. The more formal and far more nuanced descrip on of these processes is
known as Ecological Evolutionary Developmental Biology (’Eco-Evo-Devo’, or o en just ‘Evo-
Devo’). Every species presents abundant examples of Evo-Devo. Below, we brieﬂy explore two
high-level examples that powerfully illustrate the nature of lawful body molding.

Figure 4.39. Illustration showing how Innovation, Development, and Ecology produce
evolutionary change—the lawful molding of bodies through time. (Author illustration)
Molding Bodies ‘In the Image of’ a Swimmer 
Figure 4.40 shows the bodies of several aqua c animals. No ce that each animal has a

3 Figure 4.40 shows the bodies of several aqua c animals. No ce that each animal has a
streamlined shape that allows them to eﬃciently move through water to ﬁnd food and escape
predators—and yet, their ability as swimmers is built in diﬀerent ways. For example, some use
tails and ﬁns to propel and guide themselves, and others use legs. In addi on, some of these
animals protect themselves with scales, while others use an exoskeleton, skin, or feathers.
What’s more, these animals display even greater internal variability, including signiﬁcant genetic
diﬀerences.

Figure 4.40. Photos of aqua c animal bodies. (Author Illustration, images from Wikimedia)
Interestingly, the fusiform shapes of these animals do not result from following similar ‘recipes’
or ‘programming’. Instead, their analogous shapes result from lifestyles with similar selection
pressures. In other words, the aqua c lifestyles of these animals produced their shapes—as
selection across numerous generations eliminated body a ributes that inhibited movement in
water and progressively promoted the development of ever-more-torpedo-shaped bodies. Said
a third way, lawful body molding produced the streamlined bodies of these eﬃcient swimmers.
Signiﬁcantly, the asser on that aqua c animals developed their shapes by lawful body molding
makes testable predictions about the embryology, genetics, fossil records, and other aspects of
these organisms. For example, the embryos, genetics, and fossil record of dolphins should show
that dolphin bodies were molded from terrestrial mammals. As we’ve already illustrated,
dolphin a ributes conﬁrm these predictions (e.g., Figure 4.38). What’s more, similar networks
of observations indicate that the a ributes of all organisms are molded in this way. In fact, it’s
these types of webs of conﬁrmed predictions that provide humanity with such conﬁdence in
the reality of lawful body molding.
Molding Placental and Marsupial Bodies 
As you know, there are three kinds of mammals: placentals, mammals like us whose oﬀspring
connect to their mothers through the placenta and stay in the womb un l all the organs
function; marsupials, mammals like kangaroos and opossum who give birth to rela vely
undeveloped young that o en reside in mom’s abdominal pouch as they continue developing;
and monotremes, mammals like platypus that lay eggs. Figure 4.41 shows four mammals. Take

4 and monotremes, mammals like platypus that lay eggs. Figure 4.41 shows four mammals. Take
a moment to decide which of these animals are most closely related to each other.

Figure 4.41. Photos of ‘mouse’ and ‘wolf’ bodies for placental mammals from North American
and marsupial mammals from Australia. (Author Illustration, photos from Wikimedia)
If you iden ﬁed the two ‘mice’ and two ‘wolves’ as the most closely related, your choice was
intui ve and reasonable but completely wrong. In reality, the marsupial mouse and wolf are
much more closely related to each other than either is to its similarly-shaped placental
counterpart. How can that be, you ask? At this point, the answer shouldn’t surprise you
because you know that the shapes of bodies are lawfully molded, by the processes illustrated in
Figure 4.30.
Thus, the two rodents above were molded ‘in the image of’ a mouse because they live the
‘mouse’ lifestyle in the environments they inhabit. In other words, the body form best adapted
to ﬁlling the ‘mouse’ role (niche) is, well, a mouse-shaped body. Similarly, the wolf-shaped
animals have the bodies they do because that’s a very eﬃcient body form for living a ‘wolf’
lifestyle in the environments they inhabit. Can you see that lawful body molding across
numerous generations ensures that the shapes of bodies match their role (niche) in the
environment—that is, that the body forms of surviving populations become progressively well-
molded to their lifestyles? It’s an astoundingly simple, powerful, and beau ful no on. What’s
more, it’s true.
Incidentally, the stunning similari es in marsupial and placental body forms extend far beyond
mice and wolves. For example, each group (marsupials and placentals) has timembers that were
created ‘in the image of’ a burrower (moles), anteater, rabbit, glider (ﬂying squirrels), cat, and
so on. How did this happen? The dis nct lineages that produced these sets of similarly shaped
bodies became isolated on their respective con nents following the timesozoic breakup of

5 bodies became isolated on their respective con nents following the timesozoic breakup of
Pangaea. However, since both con nents contained similar animal roles (niches) and
environments, similar body forms developed on each con nent. Importantly, this is not an
unsupported hypothesis. Like most aspects of evolution, the origin of similarly-shaped
marsupials and placentals is supported by numerous observations, including from all the usual
categories—ecology, embryology, genetics, fossil records, and so on. Neat stuﬀ, right?!
You likely no ced that we’ve used the scriptural wording ‘in the image of’ several times when
referring to lawful body molding. Here’s why: Have you ever considered that God was referring
to lawful body molding when teaching humanity that ‘He molded human bodies from clay, in
the image of Heavenly Parents’ (Gen 2)? Give that some thought. It’s implications are
intriguing. For example, it suggests that the sequen al development of body forms is a lawful
process.

Did Lawful Body Molding Produce Human Bodies? 

The theory of evolution explains that human bodies, like the bodies of all organisms, emerged
by descent with adaptation from ancestral organisms. In other words, evolution describes how
natural processes molded human bodies from the bodies of ancestral organisms. As a scientific
explanation, this asser on makes numerous testable predictions—speciﬁc observations that
must exist if the explanation is true. We illustrate this aspect of evolution by listing a few broad-
scale predictions below, organized by observation type:
genetic A ributes
● Humans should share abundant genes with other organisms, including control genes.
● As complex organisms, humans should have more control genes than simpler organisms.
● The human genome should contain abundant broken genes and unused DNA.
● The same (homologous) genes and processes that build body parts in ancestral organisms
should build those body parts in humans.
Embryological and Anatomical A ributes
● The development of human embryos should be most similar to closely-related animals.
● Human embryos should contain the same body parts as closely-related animals.
● As human embryos approach birth, their developing body parts should look less like those
of other animals and more like those of humans.
● Humans should have ves gial body parts that function in ancestral organisms.
A ributes of the Fossil Record
● Fossils with a ributes iden cal to modern humans should exist in the geologically-recent
past.
● Diﬀerences between the a ributes of humans and ancestral fossils should increase in
progressively older fossils.
● Human body parts—including those that are highly specialized—should be molded versions
of ancestral body parts.

6
Each of these predicted observations—together with so many, many, many more—have been
observed. Figure 4.42 illustrates that even exquisitely specialized features of human bodies like
hearing nerves and bones are molded parts of ancestral organisms. Moreover, these parts in
humans are constructed using the same (homologous) control genes and developmental
pathways as homologous parts in ancestral organisms.
For these reasons, observations of human bodies ‘as they were and are’ are unable to falsify
the no on that the human body emerged by descent with modiﬁcation from ancestral
organisms. In other words, the a ributes of past and present human bodies are consistent with
an evolutionary origin.

Figure 4.42. Illustration showing the molding of human hearing, from ﬁshes to present. Green
lines show the evolutionary development of hearing sensors, and dark gray lines show the same
for hearing bones. Light grey lines show the embryological development of hearing bones.
(Author illustration, images from Wikimedia)

To this point we’ve declared in nearly every way we know of that “the theory of evolution
contains a lot of truth.” We hope you haven’t felt badgered by the repe veness. That was not
our intent. Instead, we repeated this idea from various perspectives to help deepen and extend
your understanding of the u lity and validity of the theory of evolution and of the volume,
quality, and consistency of the observations that are unable to falsify this important scientific
theory. In addi on, we hoped to clarify what the theory of evolution is, what it is not, and why
it is portrayed as a tool of Satan by religious fundamentalists and as ‘proof’ of beliefs like
atheism and nihilism by scientific fundamentalists.
Whatever your perspective, we hope that you now understand the theory of evolution—either

7 Whatever your perspective, we hope that you now understand the theory of evolution—either
for the ﬁrst time or more deeply than before. As we move forward, we’ll rely on your
understanding of natural evolutionary processes as we explore the history of life.
