4.7 Taking a Dip in Primordial Soup 
The Early History of Life and Development of Fishes
Dr. Dan Moore and Dr. Brian Tonks, Geology and Physics Departments, BYU-Idaho

If I as a geologist were called upon to explain brieﬂy our modern ideas of the origin of the earth
and the development of life on it to a simple pastoral people, such as the tribes to whom the Book
of Genesis was addressed, I could hardly do be er than follow rather closely much of the
language of the ﬁrst chapter of Genesis. —Wallace Pra

Learning objectives:
● Describe the diﬀerences between direct divine creation (natural theology) and lawful creation
(through lawful self-assembly) as explanations of the development of life.
● Understand that observations suggest that natural processes produced the ﬁrst cells.
● Iden fy examples of the lawful body molding that produced complex ﬁshes (with lobe ﬁnes and
lungs) from early simple ﬁshes (that lacked teeth, jaws, bony skeletons, and lungs).

Before discussing the development of Life, let’s pause to refresh our perspective on direct
divine creation and lawful creation. Recall that direct divine creation emerged from literalist
interpretations of wri en scripture during the Middle Ages. This no on asserts that complex
order in the Universe, Earth, and Life cannot arise lawfully but instead can only be created by
direct divine interven on. Originally called natural theology, modern religious fundamentalists
refer to this idea as ‘creationism’, ‘creation science’, and ‘intelligent design’. In contrast, lawful
creation asserts that natural complexity emerges spontaneously through natural processes—
that is, that lawful self-assembly produced the order found in nature.
Much as direct divine creation seems consistent with wri en scripture, it suﬀers from a huge
problem: the attributes of the creations it seeks to explain witness that the complex order in
nature forms lawfully. This seemingly-insurmountable obstacle for modern ‘creationism’ is
illustrated by the contradictory claims of religious fundamentalists. These individuals
simultaneously assert that God directly created nature and that His creations do not accurately
record the events of The Creation. We reject this contradiction and witness that God’s creations
—the en rety of the physical Universe, Earth, and Life—are faithful records of The Ongoing
Creation. Said diﬀerently, we witness that ‘all aspects of the physical world denote the method
by which God created nature’. What’s more, we witness that the natural world formed through
lawful self-assembly.
Beginning with the discoveries of Newton and others in the 1600s, the por on of nature
explained by natural processes has consistently expanded. Wri en scripture foretold this
progression of human knowledge during the scientiﬁc era. In places and described it as as the

2 progression of human knowledge during the scientiﬁc era. In places and described it as as the
inspired discovery of ‘things above and beneath the Earth’. Today, ‘gaps’ in lawful explanations
or nature—where supernatural creation might still apply—are narrow and increasingly rare.
These remaining ‘gaps’ are areas where natural complexity has not yet been fully explained by
natural processes. Many proponents of ‘intelligent design’ retain their conviction that these last
areas of nature cannot be explained lawfully and must instead result from direct divine
creation. We reject this asser on. Instead, we witness that inspired discovery will con nue
iden fying the natural processes responsible each aspect of the physical world.
As we now move forward to explore the history of life, we invite you to assess your own
perspective regarding the development of life. That is, we invite you to evaluate whether life on
Earth developed lawfully or whether living things resulted from direct divine creation.

Transitioning from Inorganic to Biological Systems

Although there is suggestive evidence of life shortly a er intense bombardment of Earth’s
surface waned at ~3.8 Bya, the ﬁrst deﬁnitive evidence of living cells is from ~3.4 Bya (see
Figure 3.40). Early Earth appears to have been too hos le for the sustained emergence of living
things. Of course, the scientiﬁc theory of biological evolution addresses the development of life,
not its origin—so it is of rela vely li le help in iden fying the origin of the ﬁrst cells.
Currently, many observations suggest that early biological systems emerged lawfully from
nonliving chemical systems. However, much additional work will be required before this
hypothesis is suﬃciently well-tested to reach the status of a scientiﬁc theory. In other words,
humanity’s study of life’s origin is in its infancy, in the hypothesis stage. This fascinating and
accelerating area of scientiﬁc investigation will yield much understanding in the years to come,
so stay tuned.
Thus far, humanity has made some exciting preliminary observations and iden ﬁed key aspects
of the transition from inorganic to living systems. These transitions include the formation of
biomolecules, establishment of molecular self-replication, self-assembly of cell casings, and
formation of chemical systems that spontaneously extract energy from the environment.
In the last decades, humanity has discovered that biomolecules are everywhere. For example,
they form around dying stars and in proplyds and are found in asteroids and comets. In
addition, laboratory experiments under early-Earth conditions have spontaneously produced
complex biomolecules, simple self-replicating systems that evolve, and simple self-assembling
cell casings. What’s more, researchers are learning to create simple protocells, organelles, and
synthetic cells.
At present, observations like these fail to falsify the hypothesis that inorganic processes
naturally produced the ﬁrst living cells. Intriguingly, recent experiments have demonstrated that
clay minerals—the literal 'dust of the Earth'—can catalyze important aspects of prebiotic
systems, including the formation of cell walls and self-replicating molecules like RNA.

3
From Simple Cells to Early Animals 

Despite their an quity, humanity understands how early cells developed following their
emergence far be er than we presently understand life’s origin. For example, gene c evidence
and observations of modern equivalents suggest that the earliest cells evolved in all the usual
ways—by the novel application and modiﬁcation of existing genes, gene sharing, selection,
isolation, and so on.
Important events in the early development of life include the emergence of Earth’s ﬁrst
complex cells (eukaryotes) and sexual reproduction by ~2 Bya, the ﬁrst mul cellular organisms
(animals) by ~650 Mya, and the development of animals with primitive spinal cords and the
ability to move by ~540 Mya. With each innovation, life diversiﬁed and became more complex
—and as time passed innovations began appearing more rapidly. This acceleration resulted
from many factors, including sexual reproduction, extreme environmental change like the
emergence of atmospheric O 2, and compe on and cooperation between organisms.
The ﬁrst eukaryotes emerged from long-term cooperative relationships between dis nct single-
celled organisms. These cooperative interactions eventually became permanent cell-inside-cell
collaborations. For example, abundant observations indicate that the mitochondria that provide
fuel to all eukaryo c cells and the chloroplasts the help fuel plant cells were once separate,
stand-alone prokaryotes. This evidence includes the observation that animal cells like yours
contain two sets of DNA—a set that builds mitochondria and a set that builds your body.
What’s more, plant cells have three sets of DNA—one for the plant body, one for mitochondria,
and one for choloroplasts.

Figure 4.43. Illustration of the Ediacaran fauna, one of Earth’s ﬁrst animal communi es
(~580-540 Mya). All the organisms in this image are animals. (Wikimedia)
Like the cell-in-cell cooperation that produced complex eukaryo c cells, Earth’s ﬁrst animals
(simples sponges and jellyﬁsh) resulted from cell-to-cell cooperation inside simple colonies of
cells. These early animals emerged as oxygen levels rose to modern levels in the late
Precambrian, likely because increased oxygen allowed permanent colonies to prosper. As the

4
Precambrian, likely because increased oxygen allowed permanent colonies to prosper. As the
specialization of component cells increased, animals complexiﬁed. In this way, the specialized
cells in the cooperative communi es lost the ability to live alone as generalists. Figure 4.43
shows a reconstruction of an early animal community. Notably, fossil observations indicate that
the animals in these communi es lacked the predator-prey interactions so common in later
animal ecosystems.

Forming Early Jawless Fishes
Careful inspection of the early fossil record reveals a progression from excep onally-diﬃcult-to-
preserve single cells to very-diﬃcult-to-preserve so animal bodies to the more-easily-
preserved mineralized ‘hard parts’ of later animals. The emergence of these durable body
elements in the early Phanerozoic was part of a broader transition that involved the emergence
of body parts that facilitated interactions between organisms and their environments. These
body parts include simple feelers and eyes for sensing, primitive teeth and jaws for killing and
processing food, protective coverings for protection, and the ﬁrst simple brains for processing
newly abundant sensory information and coordinating increasingly complex movement.

Figure 4.44. Le : Illustration showing the broad-scale body molding that produced primitive
ﬁsh from a lineage of simple ﬁlter-feeding animals. Orange text iden ﬁes tunicate life stages.
Green text describes the major evolutionary transitions that produced early primitive ﬁshes.
Upper-right: Images showing an early primitive ﬁsh. Lower-right: Photo and life-stage images
of modern tunicates. (Author illustration, images modiﬁed from Wikimedia.)

5

The strong selective control of predator-prey interactions that produced these attributes
generated an ‘evolutionary arms race’ responsible for much subsequent body molding. In
addition, easily-preserved hard parts produced a much more complete fossil record. This
important volume of natural scripture partially records the molding that produced the ancestors
of ﬁshes.
The ﬁrst ﬁshes were en rely-so -bodied eel-like animals that emerged from primitive ﬁlter-
feeding invertebrates, as illustrated in Figure 4.44. An early transition in this lineage
reorganized ﬁlter-feeding arms to produce the ﬁrst gills. Ancestral tunicates emerged from
these early gilled animals. Like modern sea squirts, early tunicates had a free-swimming
juvenile stage and a stationary adult stage (Figure 4.44).
Gene c, embryological, and fossil observations indicate that early ﬁshes resulted from the
expansion of the juvenile free-swimming stage and the eventual disappearance of the
stationary adult stage. These new organisms still spent time partially submerged in mud, but
they were able to relocate when food became scarce. Figure 4.45 shows a pair of these
primitive ﬁshes swimming in a shallow early Paleozoic sea.

Figure 4.45. Illustration of a middle Cambrian seaﬂoor containing sponges (reddish), a trilobite
(lower le ), a large predator (Anomalocaris) pursuing lace crabs (Marrella, center), and
primitive ﬁsh (Pikaia, upper right). (Author illustration)

Molding Complex Fishes 

Early primitive ﬁshes were about as long as your thumb and had food-catching tentacles, gills
for extracting food and oxygen, simple mouths and guts, car laginous ‘backbones’, eyes, and
primitive spinal cords a ached to simple brains, as illustrated in Figure 4.46. As you already
suspect, the gene systems that built these body parts are the same (homologous) as those that
build them in their descendants—including complex ﬁshes, amphibians, reptiles,
dinosaurs/birds, and mammals like humans. But primitive ﬁshes had no hard parts—no teeth,
no bony jaw or skeleton, and no scales.

6

Figure 4.46. The anatomy of primitive ﬁshes (lancelets). (Adapted from Wikimedia)
As men oned, a number of animal lineages in the early Phanerozoic independently developed
the ability to form and use mineral crystals. Although diﬀerent groups used diﬀerent minerals,
these durable elements provided tremendous advantage to both predator and prey. Among
these early mineralizers were at least two lineages of simple ﬁsh. Eons of body molding in one
branch shaped early bone into a dizzying variety of parts, including diﬀerently-shaped teeth,
bones, and scales.
Bony teeth and jaws, which make eating more eﬃcient, were among the ﬁrst uses of bone
among ﬁshes. The embryos and genes of all bony-jawed animals (including human) show that
jaws are modiﬁcations of early gill supports. In later ﬁshes, body molding expanded bone use,
forming formed external armor and internal skeletons. Figure 4.47 shows an armored predatory
ﬁsh and other marine animals from the middle Paleozoic.

Figure 4.47. Illustration of a middle Paleozoic (Devonian) reef environment showing a predatory
ﬁsh with bony teeth, jaw, and armor (Dunkleosteus, a placoderm). (Author illustration)
A er jawed ﬁshes developed, molding in various lineages produced the remaining groups of
ﬁshes. Figure 4.48 shows the broad-scale descendancy relationships and relative abundances of
these groups through me. Across generations of jawed ﬁshes, bone replaced car lage

7
these groups through me. Across generations of jawed ﬁshes, bone replaced car lage
throughout the skeleton. In these now-bony ﬁshes, the skull, backbone, and ribs improved
protection for so internal organs, and the shoulder, hip, and limb bones increased limb
strength.
Additional molding in these ﬁshes produced a fold in the esophagus that acted as a primitive
lung. This newly-molded organ allowed these ﬁshes to survive in oxygen-poor water by rising to
the surface and gulping air. Later, molding of lunged ﬁshes living in rivers and shorelines
developed progressively-stronger limbs. These appendages allowed them to navigate these
shallow, obstacle-laden environments.
In the ancestors of modern ray-ﬁnned ﬁshes, the lung was molded into an air bladder, which
provided buoyancy control. Today, all ﬁshes with lungs or air bladders and all amphibians,
reptiles, birds, and mammals build this organ using the same (homologous) system of genes.
Similarly, all animals with bony skeletons use gene systems homologous to those in bony ﬁshes
to build their skeletal elements. In this way, lungs, bones, and all other homologous body parts
provide powerful examples of the unity that underlies life's diversity.

Figure 4.48. Illustration showing the development of ﬁsh groups molded from primitive jawless
ﬁshes. These include the complex car laginous and ray-ﬁn ﬁshes. Note the emergence of
amphibians and subsequent limbed animals from the lobe-ﬁnned ﬁshes. (Adapted from
Wikimedia)
As illustrated by our brief, high-level exploration of ﬁsh development, lawful body molding in
lineages of simple, en rely-so -bodied, ﬁlter-feeding animals produced ﬁshes with jaws, teeth,
scales, bony skeletons, and lungs by the mid Paleozoic (Devonian). Except for scales, these parts
allowed the descendants of lobe-ﬁnned ﬁshes with lungs to emerge from the sea and take
advantage of the abundant insect and plant food that had already moved to land.