4.8 Fishing for Ancestors 4. 8 
Molding Fish into Mammals
Dr. Dan Moore and Dr. Brian Tonks, Geology and Physics Departments, BYU-Idaho

We were not designed rationally, but are products of a convoluted history. —Neil Shubin

Learning objectives:
● Understand the basic nature of the following organisms and be able to iden fy the opportunities,
obstacles, and adaptations that characterize the transitions between them: lobe-ﬁnned ﬁshes with
lungs, amphibians, reptiles, and mammals.
● Describe the parts in amphibians, reptiles, and mammals that are homologous to bone and teeth in
ﬁshes. Also, describe the body parts in mammals, dinosaurs, and birds that are homologous to
scales in reptiles.

Complex ﬁshes with strong lobe ﬁns and lungs (see Figure 4.25) have all the body parts needed
to produce amphibians, reptiles, dinosaurs, and mammals like humans. This is why humans
share at least 70% of our genes with ﬁshes—and higher percentages with other, more closely
related animal groups. Although our body parts are shaped somewhat diﬀerently, they are built
with these shared genes. We’ve made this point now many mes, because it is so important in
appreciating how diﬀerences in gene regulation build what look like quite diﬀerent bodies using
homologous genes.
Our path forward explores the important biological states that separate modern humans from
complex ﬁshes. In addition, we will investigate the opportunities, obstacles, and adaptations
associated with the transitions between these states. These transitions include those that
produced amphibians, reptiles, mammals, primates, hominins like australopiths, Homo erectus,
and anatomically modern Homo sapiens. What’s more, the transitions also include the cultural,
agricultural, industrial, and information revolutions that produced modern humans and human
socie es.

Molding Complex Fish into Amphibians 

As men oned, the limbs and lungs of ancient lobe-ﬁnned ﬁshes allowed them to successfully
occupy shallow, obstacle-ridden swampwater containing li le oxygen. Through me, molding
stronger limbs in some lineages allowed these ﬁshes to support increasing propor ons of their
weight and, eventually, to survive on land. These ﬁshes became Earth’s ﬁrst amphibians.
Amphibians are animals that cannot regulate their body temperature (cold blooded); have
lungs, four strong limbs that allow them to move on land using sprawling postures, and

2 lungs, four strong limbs that allow them to move on land using sprawling postures, and
permeable skin that lacks scales and poorly retains moisture; lay eggs in water, like ﬁsh; begin
life as ﬁsh (complete with gills, ﬁns, and tail) but undergo a metamorphosis during which their
ﬁsh parts resorb and amphibian parts grow; and live semi-terrestrial lifestyles as adults.
Amphibians—the ﬁrst true four-legged (tetrapod) animals on Earth—originated in the mid
Paleozoic (~370 Mya). Modern examples of amphibians include frogs, salamanders, and newts.
Many of the broad-scale transitions in the history of life resulted from adaptations that allowed
organisms to ‘follow the food’—for example, from environments where compe on for food
was ﬁerce into environments where there was rela vely li le compe on. In the early
Paleozoic, early plants and insects moved from sea to land for the ﬁrst me. Reproduction
restricted these plants and the trees that followed them to coastal wetlands. At this time in mid
Paleozoic, Pangaea was forming, Earth’s climate was in the greenhouse state, sea level
ﬂuctuations were common, and wetland forests abounded. The paucity of predators and
abundance of insect and plant food in these swampy forests represented huge opportunities for
the lobe-ﬁnned ﬁshes with lungs that inhabited shallow, near-shore environments.
Like the opportunities, the obstacles associated with this transition were signiﬁcant. On land,
aqua c animals cannot move eﬃciently or reproduce, and they dry out and struggle to extract
suﬃcient oxygen from air. In addition, most aqua c organisms hear poorly. On land, even poor
hearing provides tremendous advantage—for example, in ﬁnding prey, communica ng, and
avoiding predators.
As insect-ﬁlled forests expanded, body molding allowed groups of lobe-ﬁnned ﬁshes to ever-
more-successfully occupy shorelines environments. Important adaptations included
modiﬁcations to the skeleton and musculature that increased mobility, the loss of scales,
improved breathing through lungs and permeable skin, and the molding of head elements into
a primitive inner ear and voice box.
Of course, lobe-ﬁnned ﬁshes didn’t develop these adaptations with the purpose of moving to
land. Instead, the adaptations resulted from natural selection for attributes that allowed these
organisms to succeed in the newly-formed, opportunity-rich environment produced by the
emergence of shoreline forests. This is an important aspect of evolution. Organisms don’t
acquire traits to succeed. Instead, lawful body molding in a par cular environment some times
produces populations of organisms with attributes that happen to be advantageous in another
environment.
In this case, the attributes that allowed lobe-ﬁnned ﬁshes to successfully navigate near-shore,
oxygen-poor, obstacle-laden environments also allowed them to move into opportunity-rich
shoreline environments on land. Figure 4.49 illustrates the transition from complex ﬁshes with
limbs and lungs to early amphibians, and Figure 4.42 illustrates the molding of a ﬁsh jaw bone
into the inner ear bone of amphibians and reptiles.

3

Figure 4.49. Illustration showing the transition from bony ﬁshes with lungs to amphibians.
(Author illustration; le image modiﬁed from Shu erstock; right images from Wikimedia.)
As you know, lobe-ﬁnned ﬁshes possess the parts and pieces that comprise more evolved
vertebrate bodies. For example, these ﬁshes have brains, hearts, lungs, blood vessels, mouths,
jaws, teeth, stomachs, intes nes, backbones, limbs, skulls, ears, kidneys, gonads, eggs, sperm,
DNA, mitochondria, and all the control and other genes to build and shape their body parts and
bodies. Figure 4.50 uses limb bones to illustrate these pervasive homologies. No ce this
important pa ern: the bones in mammal limbs result from reshaping, elimina ng, and
duplicating existing body elements—not from forming all-new, unrelated body parts.

Figure 4.50. Illustration of limb bones in organisms that record the transitions that produced
mammals from primitive ﬁshes. Note the development of the vertebrate limb pa ern: one
bone, two bones, small bones, aligned bones. (Author illustration, adapted from M. Tanaka)
Remarkably, this eﬃcient process also formed ‘apparently new’ body parts. For example, the
earliest lateral ﬁsh ﬁns resulted when the set of genes that controlled the formation of ‘spinal
segments’ was duplicated and expressed along the sides of primitive ﬁshes. Thus even an ‘all
new’ feature like lateral ﬁns resulted from duplicating and repurposing existing body elements.
Such is the origin of most ‘new’ body elements in organisms. This pa ern underscores an
important point we have reemphasize again: although many animal bodies—including human
bodies—look quite diﬀerent from the bodies of lobe-ﬁnned ﬁshes and amphibians, they are

4
bodies—look quite diﬀerent from the bodies of lobe-ﬁnned ﬁshes and amphibians, they are
built according to a homologous pa ern using homologous parts and processes.

Molding Amphibians into reptiles 

Early amphibians developed and diversiﬁed in the low-lying wetlands that were abundant
during the late Paleozoic (Carboniferous). On land, they became the top terrestrial predators.
The largest of these was ~30 (~9 m) long and had a crocodile-shaped body because it lived a
‘crocodile lifestyle’. Once on land, amphibians faced a new set of opportunities and obstacles.
These produced adaptations that eventually formed the ﬁrst reptiles.
reptiles are cold-blooded animals that have sprawling postures; scales to protect their skin
from drying out; and claws that help them interact with hard terrestrial environments. reptiles
reproduce by laying encased eggs on land. Lizards, crocodiles, and turtles are modern examples
of reptiles. Ex nct examples include Mesozoic pterosaurs, plesiosaurs, and mosasaurs.
As the late Paleozoic Earth cooled and dried, intense selection in shrinking wetland forests
produced the ﬁrst seed-bearing plants (gymnosperms). This innovation allowed plants to begin
thriving in drier habitats far from standing water. Inland plants and insects provided a signiﬁcant
opportunity for any amphibian population that could overcome the associated obstacles—such
as weak skin that required frequent re-weting and gela nous eggs that quickly shriveled
outside water.
As plants and insects expanded into con nental interiors, body molding across numerous
generations allowed groups of amphibians to take advantage of these untapped resources by
adapting to progressively drier environments. These adaptations included modiﬁcations to skin
and eggs. Through me, the skin in transitional populations developed hardened-protein
coverings (scales and claws) that improved success in dry, light-saturated, abrasive
environments. In addition, eggs developed durable coverings (shells) that protected developing
embryos from desiccation, disease, and some predators.
reptile scales consist mostly of hardened kera n, a protein that helps protect the skin of
amphibians (and ﬁshes). As such, reptile scales and claws are homologous to ﬁsh and
amphibian skin, but not to ﬁsh scales. Later, we’ll discover that the feathers, claws, and beaks
(rhamphotheca) of dinosaurs and birds and the hair, claws, nails, and horns of mammals are
homologous to reptile scales and claws.
reptiles were the ﬁrst land vertebrates to develop adaptations that allowed them to reproduce
in dry environments. Their modiﬁed (amnio c) eggs are full-service embryo incubation devices.
The yolk provides food, the egg ‘white’ provides moisture, and the ssues (including the
amnion) and a leathery or mineralized shell protect the embryo while allowing it to breathe, as
illustrated in Figure 4.51. Interes ngly, reptile eggs did for animals what seeds did for plants.

5

Figure 4.51. Photos of ﬁsh, amphibian, and reptile eggs. (Fish image from Wikimedia; other
images from Shu erstock)

Molding reptiles Into Mammals 

As reptiles moved into new terrestrial environments in the late Paleozoic, they diversiﬁed,
outcompeted many amphibians, and became Earth’s top terrestrial predators. Despite their
successes, reptiles move ineﬃciently and slowly, lose heat easily, cannot regulate their body
temperature, hear poorly, can be vulnerable while incubating eggs, and process food
ineﬀec vely because they have no lips and only cone-shaped teeth. These obstacles prevented
reptiles from entering cold terrestrial environments and provided opportunities for the
numerous eﬃciency-increasing innovations that eventually produced the ﬁrst mammals.
Mammals are four-limbed animals that have fully-erect, non-sprawling postures; have large
strong jaws, lips, and diﬀeren ated teeth; develop embryos inside their bodies and feed infants
with milk; can regulate their body temperature and have hair; have three inner ear bones; and
can inhabit essen ally all terrestrial landscapes.
The transitions that produced amphibians and reptiles from their ancestors involved a few key
innovations that emerged rela vely quickly. In contrast, the stepwise transitions that produced
true mammals from reptiles involved many independent innovations and lasted nearly two
hundred million years. As a result, transitional groups persisted for long periods alongside true
reptiles. The le image in Figure 4.52 shows a confrontation between a scale-covered reptile
and an early, mammal-like (transitional) reptile with hair and weakly-diﬀeren ated teeth.
These adaptations included fully-upright postures that allowed eﬃcient and sustained rapid
movement; hair (modiﬁed scales) that minimizes heat loss; the development of metabolic
processes that regulate body temperature; the emergence of diﬀeren ated teeth—cutters,
slicers, and grinders—and lips that improved food processing; the molding of additional skull
bones to improve hearing and vocalization; the reten on of developing embryos inside the
body; and extended care of infants, including feeding using molded sweat glands that excrete
nutrient-rich ﬂuids (milk).

6
Notably, the specialized sweat glands that give mammals their name are homologous to those
that ﬁsh and amphibians use to nourish their eggs. In humans and many other ‘later-stage’
mammals, these glands are concentrated in nipple-topped breasts. Did you know that some
male humans can produce milk and suckle infants? It’s rare, but male breasts and nipples are
not yet completely ves gial.
Signiﬁcantly, mammalian adaptations did not develop independently. For example, the energy
required to be more mobile, regulate body temperature, and enhance infant care was provided
by energy-saving and -enhancing adaptations like upright postures, hair, and improved food
processing, hearing, and communication.
The descendancy relationships between ﬁshes, amphibians, reptiles, and mammals discussed
above produced the pervasive homologies that characterize vertebrate bodies. Table 4.12
provides notable examples.
Table 4.12. Vertebrate homologies.

As an important aside, the branch of reptiles that produced dinosaurs included adaptations
similar to mammals. For example, dinosaurs also developed upright postures capable of
sustained rapid movement, feathers that reduce heat loss, and metabolism capable of
regulating body temperature—but dinosaurs did not develop lips, highly diﬀeren ated teeth, or
three inner-ear bones. They also con nued laying reptile-like eggs. The right images in Figure
4.52 shows a confrontation between two dinosaurs.

Figure 4.52. Illustrations showing terrestrial landscapes in the late Paleozoic (Permian; le ) and
late Mesozoic (Cretaceous; right). (Author illustrations)

7

Above, we provide a high-level view of the complex transitions that produced amphibians from
lobe-ﬁnned ﬁshes with lungs, reptiles from amphibians, and mammals from reptiles. Having
explored these transitions, we invite you to take a moment to reﬂect on the importance of
lawful body molding (Figure 4.39) in the development of life on Earth. As we proceed, we’ll
con nue to take this same broad-scale approach, which emphasizes the opportunities,
obstacles, and adaptations associated to explore successive transitions in the lawful
organization of the human body.