4.9 Well I’ll Be a Monkey’s Uncle! …er, Primate’s Nephew
Molding Mammals into Hominins
Dr. Dan Moore and Dr. Brian Tonks, Geology and Physics Departments, BYU-Idaho

Religion and science are the two conjugated faces or phases of one and the same complete act of
knowledge—the only one which can embrace the past and future of evolution and so
contemplate, measure and fulﬁll them. —Pierre Teilhard de Chardin
Learning Objec ves:
● Understand the basic nature of the following organisms and be able to iden fy the opportuni es,
obstacles, and adaptations that characterize the transitions between them: mammals, primates,
precursor hominins, and australopiths (early hominins).
● Describe the oﬃcial position and relevant doctrines of the Church of Jesus Christ regarding the role
of evolution in the development of life and in the origin of human bodies.

In meaningful ways, lobe-ﬁnned ﬁshes are bony, lunged ﬁshes adapted to succeed in oxygen-
poor, obstacle-laden shallow water. In this same way, amphibians are swampy-shoreline-
adapted lobe-ﬁnned ﬁshes, reptiles are dry-land-adapted amphibians, and mammals are fully-
land-adapted or eﬃciently-land-adapted reptiles.

Figure 4.53. Illustration showing the adaptations that produced mammals from primitive ﬁlter-
feeders. (Modiﬁed from Wikimedia)

2

Said diﬀerently, mammals have ﬁsh bodies that were molded to eﬃciently live terrestrial
lifestyles. Thus, viewed through the lens of lawful body molding, mammals and ﬁshes are far
less diﬀerent than they seem. Figure 4.53 illustrates some of these important adaptations.
This powerful high-level perspective can also be applied to earlier transitions. For example,
complex ﬁshes can be thought of as predation-adapted so -bodied ﬁshes; primitive ﬁshes as
mobility-adapted simple animals; primitive animals as cooperation-adapted colonies of complex
cells; and eukaryo c cells as symbiosis-adapted simple cells. What’s more, simple cells can be
thought of as replicative inorganic systems adapted to extract energy from the near-surface
chemical reactions that stalled when Earth cooled. Having explored these earlier transitions, we
turn our a en on to the origins of primates, precursor hominins, and australopiths.

Molding Mammals into Primates 

As men oned, both mammals and dinosaurs (including birds) are eﬃciency-adapted reptiles.
Both lineages developed attributes that allowed them to inhabit the globe, from oceans to
mountaintops and equator to poles. The development of these groups took some interes ng
turns. For example, in the late Paleozoic mammal-like reptiles (synapsids) emerged to dominate
terrestrial environments. However, Earth’s largest mass ex nction of animals, which ended the
Paleozoic, nearly wiped out these important precursor mammals.
Later, the molding of reptiles into dinosaurs in the early Mesozoic outpaced the recovery of
mammal-like reptiles. This allowed dinosaurs to dominate terrestrial landscapes and relegated
developing mammals to minor environmental roles (niches) like insect- and egg-ea ng
‘nocturnal burrowers’. Selection for such roles produced the rodent-like bodies so common
among Mesozoic mammals. Then, following the end-Mesozoic mass ex nction that killed all
ﬂightless dinosaurs, mammals explosively diversiﬁed into recently-vacated roles (niches) and
rose to dominate terrestrial landscapes. This diversiﬁcation included the transition that
produced the ﬁrst primates.
Primates are mammals that have forward-facing eyes, excellent depth percep on, and color
vision; grasping, dexterous hands and feet; ﬂexible shoulders and hips; nails and highly
specialized teeth; and rela vely large brains, enhanced social complexity, and increased care
and training of the young. Humans are primates, as are monkeys, apes, and lemurs.
During the Cretaceous, ﬂowering plants emerged and developed. As the abundance and
diversity of ﬂowing trees rose, the presence of abundant insects (and later, fruit) near ﬂowers at
the ends of thin tree branches produced a new way of making a living. This lifestyle is known as
the ﬁne branch niche. Of course, only animals capable of surviving in trees can readily access
the insects a racted to trees by their ﬂowers. Finding and catching food (insects ﬁrst, then fruit)
while moving from limb to limb requires tremendous hand-foot-eye coordination. Selection for
these and related attributes molded at least one lineage of small, clawed mammals into forest-
adapted insect (and fruit) specialists called primates.

3

The body molding that produced primates included a number of important adaptations.
Binocular vision and grasping hands, feet, and tails provided developing primates the forward-
focus necessary to judge distances to insects and between branches. Likewise, features such as
opposable digits and broad so ﬁnger ps improved ability to grab branches, insects, and fruit.
What’s more, features like color vision, nails, and highly specialized teeth built capacity to select
and process tree foods. Molding in eyes produced color vision that was exquisitely-tuned to
dis nguish ripe from unripe fruit. Evolutionary sculpting of claws produced ﬁngernails that
freed ﬁnger ps for dexterous ac vi es and aided in processing food. Further, swiss-army-knife-
like den on permi ed eﬃcient processing of foods such as insects, fruit (including nuts), and
leaves.
Dexterously moving a mammal body quickly through trees, catching rapidly-moving insects, and
ﬁnding ripe fruit required increased cognition, which cra ed improved ‘central processing
units’—larger, more complex brains. In turn, the larger skulls that housed these brains required
that infants be born earlier, which increased the need for infant care and training. In addition,
enhanced cognition produced increasingly complex social interactions.
As we more closely approach the emergence of human bodies, are you starting to appreciate
the fascinating biological origins of important aspects of our bodies—attributes like our
dexterous grasping hands, nails and so ﬁnger ps, color vision, specialized teeth, extended
infant care, and complex cognition, socialization, and communication?

Molding Primates into Precursor Hominins 

Primate adaptations began in the latest Mesozoic but accelerated in the early Cenozoic a er
the ex nction of ﬂightless dinosaurs. By the mid Cenozoic, when global climate began
transitioning to the modern icehouse state, primates were fully developed. Figure 4.54 shows
several important stages in primate development. These include primitive squirrel-like primates
with eyes on the side of their heads and feet made mostly for living on and under the ground
and modern-monkey-like primates with fully-hominin den on and spines that entered more-
nearly-beneath the skull. Body molding in at least one lineage of primates produced a group of
organisms that we call ‘precursor hominins’.

Figure 4.54. Images showing primate development from early squirrel- and lemur-like forms
(le ) to monkey-like bodies (right). (Author illustration, images from Wikimedia)

4

Precursor hominins are primates that have fully-upright postures, live mostly in trees, and
cannot walk eﬃciently for long distances on their hind limbs. Gene c and fossil evidence
indicates that the lineages that produced apes and hominins began to split ~15 Mya and had
ﬁnished diverging by ~8 Mya. Fossils of primate and other arboreal animals are rela vely rare,
because decomposing forest vegetation rapidly destroys their bones. As a result, the specimens
humanity has discovered are incredibly important. Two such precursor hominin species—
Sahelanthropus tchadensis (~7 Mya) and Ardipithecus ramidus (‘Ardi’, ~4.4 Mya)—record the
emergence of precursor hominins. The skulls of both species record upright postures, but Ardi’s
foot indicates her species excelled at grasping branches but were poor bipedal walkers (Figure
4.55). Together, these specimens demonstrate that upright posture developed in trees before
bipedalism.

Figure 4.55. Images of the fossil named ‘Ardi’ (le and top), an important precursor hominin—
together with reconstructions of her body (center) and lifestyle (lower-right). (Author
illustration, images from Wikimedia)
As late Cenozoic climate became progressively cooler and drier, forests shrank and fruit became
seasonal. These conditions provided opportuni es for organisms that could gather food from
larger areas. However, using arms and hands to gather and carry food presents a signiﬁcant
obstacle. It makes those appendages unavailable for support and movement in trees, at least
while holding food.
The principal adaptation associated with the emergence of precursor hominins is upright
posture. Molding that facilitated erect posture included progressively-shallowing the pelvis and
moving the spine-skull connection to directly beneath the head. Upright posture allowed
precursor hominins to more easily pick high fruit, gather food from broad areas, and carry food
to family or troop members. It also allowed them to more safely care for their infants by

5 to family or troop members. It also allowed them to more safely care for their infants by
carrying them. It did not, however, make them eﬃcient walkers.

Molding Precursor Hominins into Australopiths

Like all animals, the attributes of precursor hominins provided tradeoﬀs. For example, their
upright postures allowed them to more eﬃciently gather and share food but diminished their
ability to agilely sprint through the forest canopy. As Cenozoic climate con nued cooling, body
molding in precursor hominins produced the ﬁrst true hominins, the australopiths.
Hominins are primates that have fully upright postures and can walk eﬃciently on two limbs for
long distances; have rela vely large brains and enhanced social complexity; have compara vely
small canine teeth; and began using tools not long a er emerging. Australopiths were the ﬁrst
true hominins, the ﬁrst bipedal apes. They are known from numerous individual skeletons,
some quite complete. Unlike most later hominins, australopith brains were about the same size
as their ancestors.
In the late Cenozoic, as global climate con nued to cool and dry, shrinking forests and the
seasonality of fruit diminished the reliability of the traditional forest foods of precursor
hominins. As grasslands grew, plains food became more abundant and represented a signiﬁcant
opportunity for animals with the necessary attributes. These foods included fruit and nuts
(when available), roots (tubers), insects, leaves, and scavengeable meat. For precursor
hominins, the principal obstacles to accessing plains foods were the ability to move safely
across predator-infested grasslands between isolated, protective forests.
At least one lineage of precursor hominin adapted to the eﬀects of cooler drier climate by
progressively adopting a ‘gathering’ (foraging) lifestyle on the expanding grasslands. Many of
the important adaptations involved modiﬁcations to the the hips, legs, feet, hands, and teeth.
Australopith feet and posture made them excellent long-distance walkers, and their hands
allowed them to dexterously pick, dig, and process plains food. Their hands were also capable
of making and using simple tools, which transitioned from primitive broken rocks by ~3.6 Mya
to consistently-shaped forms such as ‘pebble choppers’ by ~2.6 Mya. Of course, the very
attributes that made australopiths successful plains foragers diminished their ability to move
eﬀec vely in trees.
Australopith teeth indicate that common foods included fruit/nuts, leaves, and roots. In
addition, tool marks on ~3.4 My old animal bones suggest that at least some australopiths used
sharp stone tools to scavenge meat. However, Australopith bodies were rela vely slow and
weak, and they lacked sharp teeth and claws. These attributes prevented them from
consistently accessing the calorie-rich meat found abundantly in large plains animals.
This problem was resolved in later hominins, as molding produced attributes that allowed them
to be active on the plains during the ho est por ons of the day, when predators and other
large plains animals are least ac ve. If this strategy started with australopiths, then adaptations
like diminished body hair and increased sweat gland abundance—for which there is clear

6
like diminished body hair and increased sweat gland abundance—for which there is clear
evidence later—may have begun at this me.
Australopithecus afarensis individuals stood 3.5 - 4 feet tall (1–1.2 m), weighed 30-70 pounds
(15-30 kg), and had heavy brow ridges and ‘snouty’ faces, as illustrated in Figure 4.56. Males of
the species were larger than females, indicating adaptation for divided responsibili es.
Signiﬁcantly, evidence suggests that australopiths were much more like ‘apes that walk’ than
like ‘small humans’.
No australopiths have been discovered outside the cradle of humanity, Africa. In fact,
essen ally all the important developments that produced modern humans occurred inside
Africa. For this and other important reasons, humanity owes a tremendous debt of gra tude
and respect to the peoples of Africa. At present, this debt remains largely unpaid.


