

Sensitive topics are those that appear to be at odds
with our cultural standards, religious beliefs, political
opinions, or personal biases. By this definition, some topics
addressed in science courses are sensitive. Examples of
scientific explanations that some church members consider
controversial include the “Big Bang” model of the universe,
a 4.6-billion-year-old Earth, and the evolutionary origin
of the human body. Students and others frequently ask us
how we reconcile our professional lives as scientists with
our faith. Almost invariably, they want help knowing how
to resolve apparent conflicts between scientific and revealed
truth about the origins of the universe, the Earth, and the
human body. We suggest that the individuals best prepared
to appropriately address these topics are those who

correctly understand the nature, strengths, and limitations
of both revealed and scientific truth, and who approach
learning as both faithful disciples and wise scholars.

understanding and using revealed
and scientific truth
What is truth? “…Truth is knowledge of things as they
are, and as they were, and as they are to come” (D&C
93:24). Revelation and scientific discovery represent
complementary approaches to obtaining truth (Scott,
2007). Heavenly Father expects us to be skilled at
using both study and faith (D&C 88:118) to learn how
the physical world works (D&C 88:78–80). Finding,
embracing, and using truth wisely are among the most
important things we can do in this life ( John 8:32; D&C
93:36, 130:18–19).
The space limitations of this article do not allow
detailed descriptions of revealed and scientific truth—
topics that have been explored extensively elsewhere.
Our descriptions provide a brief introduction. Because
you already understand the nature of revealed truth, we
focus this introduction primarily on the characteristics of
scientific truth.
The processes of discovering truth through science
and revelation are similar in that both involve foundational
assumptions and experimentation. However, there are
important differences in their respective tests for truth.
How do we identify revealed and scientific truth? And
what do we mean when we say something is true—in our
religion and in science?

revealed truth
God knows all truth and reveals it according to His will.
Revealed truth incorporates both prophetic revelation,
which gives us official doctrine, and personal revelation,
which allows individuals to know that a particular doctrine
is true. “The official doctrine of the Latter-Day Saints
is clearly defined and readily accessible to all. Doctrines
are official if they are found in the standard works of the
Church, if they are sustained by the Church in general
conference, or if they are taught by the First Presidency
as a presidency” (Robinson, 1998). The Holy Ghost can
confirm the truthfulness of official doctrine through

Seeking
Truth through
Science and
Religion:
Being Disciple
Scholars
DAN MOORE, BRIAN TONKS, AND ALAN HOLYOAK

 13

powerful subjective experiences available to anyone who
pays the price. What God reveals to us through the Holy
Ghost we know with great certainty.
Revealed truth provides instructions for salvation,
moral standards, and knowledge of God’s will, but rarely
provides knowledge about how things work, including
how the physical world works. While God could choose
to reveal anything, He rarely reveals what we can
discover on our own. The atonement illustrates some
of the strengths and limitations of revealed truth: we
know with absolute certainty the atonement is true and
we know what to do to qualify for its saving power, but
we understand very little about how it works. Scriptural
accounts of the creation of the physical world are also
illustrative: the accounts provide us with the identity of
the Creator, the purposes of the creation, and a general
outline of what was created, but tell us very little about
how the creation was accomplished or how the physical
world works.

scientific truth
We can also find truth using the methods of science (Scott,
2007). Scientists typically use the methods of science more
formally than others, but we all use them many times each
day as we ask questions, observe the world around us, and
make decisions. In order to understand what scientific
truth is and how it is discovered, we must understand how
science uses the terms empirical observation, scientific law,
hypothesis, and theory. (For deeper coverage of these topics
see Tonks 2007).
Empirical observations are factual descriptions of
the physical world gathered through experiences anyone
can duplicate, and are made directly with the physical
senses or with instruments that extend the senses. The
validity of empirical observations does not depend on an
observer’s philosophical perspective, personal opinion,

or mood. Indeed, science does not accept many sensory
experiences as observational data. Does this mean that
subjective observations are not meaningful? Not at all: it
means that science can only answer questions based on
empirical observations. Science is not anti-religion or anti-
God. It simply cannot answer questions based on subjective
observations.
Scientific laws are generalized statements that
represent many empirical observations, and are often
represented as mathematical formulas. Scientific laws do
not describe why or how a process occurs; they describe
what occurs. An example will illustrate. Newton’s Law
of Universal Gravitation is expressed mathematically,
as follows: F=(Gm 1 m 2)/r 2. This law is used to describe
the amount of gravitational force between objects. As a
law it is a “super-observation” in that it is a generalized
observation about many specific observations. This law
explains what the effects of gravity are, but does not
describe why it exists or how it is generated.
Scientists seek to explain or interpret observations
and laws. This requires making certain assumptions about
how the physical world operates, e.g., that humans can
understand the universe, mathematical relationships can
accurately describe the physical universe, observations
result from mechanistic laws, and the laws of nature apply
throughout the history of the universe and everywhere in
the universe. While reasonable and supported by strong
evidence, science can neither prove nor disprove these
foundational assumptions. Therefore, at its foundation,
science relies on faith.
How can we know if a scientific claim is an
observation or an interpretation? Here’s one useful way:
Ask the question “How do you know that statement is
true?” If the question can be answered solely by pointing
at something, then the assertion is an observation. If,
however, the answer requires an explanation, then the

Revealed truth provides instructions for salvation,
moral standards, and knowledge of God’s will,
but rarely provides knowledge about how things
work, including how the physical world works.



assertion is an interpretation. For example, suppose
we observe a triangular-shaped feature within a layer
of rock that has the size and shape of a shark’s tooth.
The observation is the description of the feature and its
attributes—the things we can point to. To say that the
feature is the fossilized remains of an ancient shark’s tooth
is an interpretation.
There are two kinds of scientific interpretations:
hypotheses and theories. Scientists use these terms
differently than most of the general public. Hypotheses are
untested or little-tested explanations often referred to as
educated guesses that are based on empirical observations,
scientific laws, and logical thinking. Hypotheses that
are not testable are not scientific; they are speculations.
Theories are hypotheses that have withstood intense
scrutiny and numerous independent tests. They are
accurate descriptions of the observations against which
they have been tested. Science considers theories to be
strong or weak, not right or wrong. Strong theories have
withstood more tests and therefore explain a larger body of
empirical observations than weak theories.
Both hypotheses and theories share a critical
characteristic that distinguishes science from other areas
of human inquiry: they predict what we should observe if
the interpretation accurately describes reality. Predictions
allow science to test its interpretations and lead scientists
to make new observations that would not have been made
(at that time) without the interpretation. If the predicted
outcome is not observed, the interpretation is falsified. If
the predicted outcome is observed, then our confidence
that the interpretation is true grows.
In addition to being tested, scientific conclusions must
be subjected to critical, independent peer-review before
they can be considered valid. Peer-review minimizes the
chances that flawed methods, unsupported conclusions,

or biased results will be accepted, and increases the
probability that a scientific conclusion is true.
Scientific theories perform three critical functions.
First, they provide useful explanations of how nature
operates. In addition to satisfying curiosity, these
explanations improve the human condition. Examples
include advances in medicine and technological
innovations such as refrigerators, vehicles, and computers.
Second, scientific theories connect otherwise unrelated
observations. For example, the theory of evolution ties
together observations of antibiotic resistant bacteria, the
distribution of plants and animals on the Earth, molecular
genetics, and the fossil record. Finally, theories guide future
research, helping us learn more about nature.
Science cannot prove that its interpretations are
true; it can only prove them false. This means that science
can never be completely certain that a theory represents
absolute truth. Science can and does, however, discover
absolute truth—there’s just no way to know when an
absolute truth has been found. Since science cannot know
when a particular theory is absolutely true, scientists
continually test theories against new observations. As a
result, science is self-correcting: continual testing increases
confidence in theories, causes better theories to be
developed, and brings us closer to absolute truth.
In short, science provides us with a powerful, self-
correcting way to discover how the physical world
works. Scientific theories are accurate descriptions of the
observations against which they have been tested, but
science cannot determine which scientific explanations are
absolutely true. As new observations are made, scientists
expect theories to strengthen or be replaced by better
explanations of reality. We know a scientific conclusion is
valid if it has been observed empirically or if it explains
a set of related observations, and is not disputed by other
empirical evidence.
Seeking Truth through Science and Religion
Heavenly Father has provided us with the means to find
truth through revelation and through science. The analogy
of a toolbox helps us see the significance of knowing that
both approaches have great value, and when each approach
should be used.

What God reveals to
us through the Holy
Ghost we know with
great certainty.

 15

A useful toolbox contains many tools because each
tool is designed to do a specific job. Each tool’s strengths
and limitations derive from its design. We could, for
example, try to use a sledge hammer to remove the lug
nuts from a car’s wheel, but let’s not: we’re likely to damage
something; the hammer is the wrong tool for the job. Still,
we don’t throw the hammer out; there are other jobs the
hammer does best. We must understand the strengths and
limitations of each tool if we are to use them (individually
or in combination) without breaking things. Similarly, it is
essential to use revelation and scientific discovery for the
jobs they were designed for: revelation mostly provides
access to truth about salvation, God’s will, and the purposes
of life, while the methods of science provide access to truth
about how the physical world works. For example, only
revelation can answer the question “Is there a God?”, and
scientific discovery best answers the question “How can
I make a computer processor faster?” On the other hand,
some questions require both approaches: scientific and
revealed truth both shed light on the question “How can I
become a better learner or teacher?” The most challenging
questions are those for which the answers provided by
scientific discovery cannot be fully reconciled at present
with the answers given by revelation. One such question
is “How was the universe formed?” At present, we do not
know enough to fully harmonize the scientific and revealed
truths that are pertinent to answering this question.

How can we best handle these kinds of questions?
We suggest that the best approach is to use all available
revealed and scientific truth to identify the range of
answers that have the greatest likelihood of being true
(see Figure 1). This approach assumes that any truth is
compatible with all other truth, no matter its source, and
that true answers will be compatible with both God’s
works (i.e., empirical observations of the physical world)
and God’s words (i.e., official doctrine).
We can use the concepts depicted in Figure 1
to identify the range of possible correct answers to a
particular question. The horizontal line represents the
range of possible answers. Each of these answers is tested
against empirical observations and official doctrine. Any
interpretation of God’s works that is contrary to official
doctrine lies in the “Zone of False Scientific Speculation”
and should be discarded. Likewise, any interpretation of
God’s words about the physical world that is contrary to
empirical observations lies in the “Zone of False Religious
Speculation” and should also be discarded. The remaining
answers, which lie within the “Zone of Truth”, are
consistent with both God’s words and God’s works.
The dot in the “Zone of Truth” represents the true answer
to the question, which will be found in the future.
Two examples illustrate the utility of this approach.
First, imagine that someone proposes, based on
discovering that physical systems are governed by natural



Figure 1. This diagram illustrates an approach to constraining answers to a question that currently cannot be fully resolved by scientific and revealed
truth. The line represents all possible answers to the question of interest. Answers based on interpretations of scientific observations that
contradict revealed truth are found in the “ZONE OF FALSE SCIENTIFIC SPECULATION”. Likewise, opinions based on interpretations of scriptural statements
that contradict scientific observations of the physical world are located in the “ZONE OF FALSE RELIGIOUS SPECULATION”. The “ZONE OF TRUTH” contains
those answers that are consistent with both revealed truth and scientific observation. The circle in the “ZONE OF TRUTH” represents the true answer
that will be revealed/discovered in the future. This approach provides a faithful and scholarly way to constrain where that truth is mostly likely
found for these kinds of questions.

law, that there is no need for a Creator. That interpretation
is falsified by official doctrine, which clearly states that
God is the Creator of the universe, a truth the Holy Ghost
can confirm to any honest seeker. Of course, the doctrine
and our testimonies say little about how Gods create
and even less about the specific laws that govern physical
systems. The doctrine and our testimonies do, however,
falsify the “No-need-for-a-Creator” interpretation. Second,
imagine that someone proposes that the Earth is stationary
at the center of the universe because of the way they
interpret particular scriptures. Empirical observations,
including the phases of Venus and parallax of stars, falsify
this interpretation. Of course, those observations say
nothing about the veracity of the scripture, only that the
“Earth-centered-universe” interpretation of that scripture
is false. This approach provides us with the ability to
identify falsehood without “throwing the baby out with

the bathwater”. Using the approach requires humility
and moderation, but safeguards against “breakage” by
encouraging “the appropriate use of tools”.

being disciple scholars
Using both scientific and revealed truth to answer
questions requires that we become both dedicated disciples
and knowledgeable scholars, as illustrated in Figure 2.
The vertical axis of this figure represents “Discipleship”,
a deep commitment to find and do God’s will. The
horizontal axis indicates “Scientific Scholarship”, the
honest search for truths about the physical world through
empirical observation.

At its foundation,
science relies on faith.

SCIENTIFICALLY UNLEARNED

RELIGIOUS FUNDAMENTALIST
• Seeks to find God’s will through
revelation; Seeks to do God’s will
• Offhandedly dismisses what can be
learned from scientific discovery about
God’s works, i.e., the physical world

SCIENTIFICALLY LEARNED

SCIENTIFIC FUNDAMENTALIST
• Seeks to understand how the physical
world works through scientific discovery
• Offhandedly dismisses what can be
learned form God’s words, i.e., revelation

DiSCIPLESCHOLAR
• Seeks to find God’s will through
revelation; Seeks to do God’s will
• Seeks to understand how the physical
world works through scientific discovery

IGNORANT
• Offhandedly dismisses what can be learned
form God’s words, i.e., revelation
• Offhandedly dismisses what can be learned
from science about God’s works, i.e., the
physical world

Figure 2. This diagram illustrates various approaches to finding truth. The positive “DISCIPLESHIP” axis represents a strong
commitment to finding God’s will through revelation and doing it. The positive “SCIENTIFIC SCHOLARSHIP” axis represents the
honest search for knowledge of the physical world through study, reason, and research. Common attributes are listed in each
quadrant. Heavenly Father expects us to be both faithful disciples and wise scholars.

 17

“Disciple Scholars” value both revealed and
scientific truth. In contrast, “Scientific Fundamentalists”
and “Religious Fundamentalists” are characterized by
different versions of one-sided extremism. Those in the
“Ignorant” quadrant are characterized by lack of exposure,
apathy, and/or foolishness with regard to discipleship and
scientific scholarship.

scientific and religious fundamentalism
Fundamentalism is characterized by zealous, unreasoning
adherence to one’s viewpoint—even in the face of
overwhelming evidence to the contrary—and intolerance
of other perspectives. Fundamentalists often use “straw
man” arguments—developing and then refuting distorted
versions of their opponent’s ideas—to reinforce false
divisions and to paint their opponents as stupid, deceived,
or evil. These individuals are often so certain they are right
that they feel justified coercing others to think or act like
they do. The coercion takes any available form: shaming,
mocking, shunning, suing, firing, banning, imprisoning,
and/or killing.
Scientific and religious fundamentalists generally
believe that every important question can be fully answered
by either scientific or revealed truth. They find it easy to
dismiss truth from the other side without serious analysis.
They draw Figure 1 with only one constraint. These
individuals are commonly unlearned about, misunderstand,
and/or mistrust truths from the other camp. When exposed
to a truth from the other side, they often approach it from
a “How can I prove it wrong?” perspective. Fundamentalists
tend to overestimate both what is known from their camp’s
truth and the certainty with which it is known.
Fundamentalist teachers lead their students to believe
that scientific and revealed truth are mutually exclusive
and encourage or coerce their students to choose one and
reject the other. They typically present their position as
the only rational or faithful way to understand the issue
being studied and are willing (intentionally or not) to place
students in situations that create crises of faith.

disciple scholars
Disciple Scholars have deep respect for truth learned from
the study of God’s word and God’s works. They understand

the strengths and limitations of scientific and of revealed
truth, recognize when each is best used, and know how
to approach apparent conflicts between them. Disciple
Scholars know that both scientific and revealed truth are
eternally important, but that the doctrines of salvation are
the most important truths. They use this priority structure
in making decisions. These individuals approach the search
for both revealed and scientific truth with a sincere heart;
i.e., they want to know the truth. They also have real intent;
i.e., they want to know the truth so much that they intend
to incorporate and act on the truth they find. They are
willing to let go of their personal opinions and biases to
know the truth. This approach qualifies them to “learn the
truth of all things” (Moroni 10:4–5).
Disciple Scholars seek to reconcile and harmonize
revealed and scientific truth. To be sure, they see areas in
which a final answer is currently out of reach, but they are
willing to exercise patience and know that current apparent
conflicts will resolve themselves through time.
Disciple Scholars are anxious to help others find truth
while avoiding the pitfalls of fundamentalism. When
teaching, they try to eliminate situations that might
damage a student’s faith. They make certain their students
understand the relative importance of revealed and
scientific truth; namely, that the doctrines of salvation are
essential for redemption. They do not coerce their students
through mocking or shame. They strive to help students
harmonize and integrate rather than divide and ridicule.
They emphasize approach over opinion by helping students
learn how to reconcile truth from both spheres, rather than
filling them full of speculations.
Two quotes illustrate the perspective of Disciple
Scholars. The first is from rocket scientist Werner von Braun
(1965), who said the following about science and religion:

Science cannot prove
that its interpretations
are true; it can only
prove them false.



Many people find the churches, those old ramparts of
faith, badly battered by the onslaught of three hundred
years of scientific skepticism. This has led many to
believe that science and religion are not compatible,
that “knowing” and “believing” cannot live side by
side. Nothing could be farther from the truth. Science
and religion are not antagonists. On the contrary, they
are sisters. While science tries to learn more about
the creation, religion tries to better understand the
Creator. While through science man tries to harness
the forces of nature around him, through religion
he tries to harness the forces of nature within him.
(quotation marks and italics in the original text)

The second is from scientist and LDS Apostle John
A. Widtsoe (1963), who said the following in a book he
wrote to help LDS educators understand the relationship
between science and religion:
Every person of honest mind loves truth above all
else. In the proposed exchange of the new for the
old, religion has often been in apparent conflict with
science. Yet, the conflict has only been apparent, for
science seeks truth, and the aim of religion is truth.
That they have occupied different fields of truth is
a mere detail. The gospel accepts and embraces
all truth; science is slowly expanding her arms,
and reaching into the invisible domain, in search
of truth. The two are meeting daily: science as
the child, religion as the mother. Earnest attempts
at reconciliation are rewarded with full success.
Occasional failures are usually due to the mistake of
alone trying religion, the more comprehensive and
better established, by the newer and less dependable
standards of science. Religion has an equal right to try
science. Either method, properly applied, leads to the
same result: truth is truth, whether labeled science or
religion. (Page 16)

conclusion
Scientific discovery and revelation are complementary
paths to truth, and Heavenly Father encourages us to be
skilled at obtaining and using truths from both. Scientific
discovery helps us figure out how the physical world

works, but does not allow us to be completely certain that
a particular explanation is absolutely true. Revealed truth
provides us with certain knowledge of God’s will and how
to gain exaltation, but rarely helps us understand how
things work. We believe using these approaches together
is currently the best way to understand “things as they
[really] are” (D&C 93:24).
While we can do little to change the extremists of
the world, we can and must do everything in our power
to become Disciple Scholars and root out any scientific
and religious fundamentalism that may exist in our lives
and at BYU–Idaho. We can accomplish this by being
humble, tolerant, loving, moderate, respectful, and deeply
committed to obtaining and embracing all truth, no matter
its source. Being Disciple Scholars will facilitate our
deliberate, patient efforts to bring scientific and revealed
truth together into one harmonious whole.
